What Does the Bible
Really Teach?
Large-Print Edition

s

bhlp-E
161025

Ask for a free Bible study.

What Does the Bible
Really Teach?
Large-Print Edition

THIS BOOK IS THE PROPERTY OF

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from
the modern-language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
What Does the Bible Really Teach?—Large Print
October 2016 Printing
English (bhlp-E)
5 2005, 2015
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
PUBLISHERS
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of
New York, Inc., Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

Is This What God Purposed?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

1. What Is the Truth About God?
2. The Bible—A Book From God

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

21
31

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

44

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

57

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

70

5. The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift
6. Where Are the Dead?

· · · · · · · · ·

82

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

95

7. Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died
8. What Is God’s Kingdom?

9. Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

11. Why Does God Allow Su?ering?

109

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

121

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

133

10. Spirit Creatures—How They A?ect Us

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

145

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

158

12. Living in a Way That Pleases God
13. A Godly View of Life

8

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

3. What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?
4. Who Is Jesus Christ?

4

14. How to Make Your Family Life Happy

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

170

15. Worship That God Approves

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

197

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

209

16. Take Your Stand for True Worship
17. Draw Close to God in Prayer

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

222

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

235

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

247

18. Baptism and Your Relationship With God
19. Remain in God’s Love
Appendix

184

Is This What God Purposed?
READ any newspaper. Look at television, or listen to the radio. There are so many stories of
crime, war, and terrorism! Think about your own
troubles. Perhaps illness or the death of a loved
one is causing you great distress. You may feel like
the good man Job, who said that he was “?lled
with dishonor and a?iction.”—Job 10:15.
Ask yourself:
? Is this what God purposed for me and for the rest
of mankind?
? Where can I ?nd help to cope with my problems?
? Is there any hope that we will ever see peace on the
earth?
The Bible provides satisfying answers to these
questions.
4

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

THE BIBLE TEACHES THAT
GOD WILL BRING ABOUT
THESE CHANGES ON THE EARTH.
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes,
and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor
outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4
“The lame will leap like the deer.”
—Isaiah 35:6
“The eyes of the blind will be opened.”
—Isaiah 35:5
“All those in the memorial tombs will . . . come out.”
—John 5:28, 29
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ ”
—Isaiah 33:24
“There will be an abundance of grain on the earth.”
—Psalm 72:16

Is This What God Purposed?

5

BENEFIT FROM WHAT
THE BIBLE TEACHES
Do not quickly dismiss what is presented on the
preceding pages as mere wishful thinking. God has
promised to bring these things about, and the Bible
explains how he will do so.
But the Bible does more than that. It provides the
key to your enjoying a truly satisfying life even now.
Think for a moment about your own anxieties and
troubles. They may include money matters, family
problems, loss of health, or the death of a loved one.
The Bible can help you to deal with problems today,
and it can provide relief by answering such questions
as these:
?
?
?
?
?
?

Why do we su?er?
How can we cope with life’s anxieties?
How can we make our family life happier?
What happens to us when we die?
Will we ever see our dead loved ones again?
How can we be sure that God will ful?ll his promises for the
future?

The fact that you are reading this book shows that
you would like to ?nd out what the Bible teaches.
This book will help you. Notice that the paragraphs
have corresponding questions at the bottom of the
6

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

page. Millions have enjoyed using the question-andanswer method when discussing the Bible with
Jehovah’s Witnesses. We hope you will too. May you
have God’s blessing as you now enjoy the thrilling
and satisfying experience of learning what the Bible
really teaches!

GET TO KNOW YOUR BIBLE
THERE are 66 books and letters that make up the Bible. These are divided into chapters and verses for
easy reference. When scriptures are cited in this publication, the ?rst number after the name indicates the
chapter of the Bible book or letter, and the next refers
to the verse. For example, the citation “2 Timothy 3:
16” means the second letter to Timothy, chapter 3,
verse 16.
You will quickly become familiar with the Bible by
looking up the scriptures cited in this publication.
Also, why not start a program of daily Bible reading?
By reading three to ?ve chapters a day, you can read
the entire Bible in a year.

Is This What God Purposed?

7

CHAPTER ONE

What Is the Truth About God?
Does God really care about you?
What is God like? Does he have a name?
Is it possible to get close to God?
HAVE you ever noticed the way children ask questions? Many start asking as soon as they learn to
speak. With wide, eager eyes, they look up at you
and ask such things as: Why is the sky blue? What
are the stars made of? Who taught the birds to sing?
You may try hard to answer, but it is not always
easy. Even your best answer may lead to yet another question: Why?
2 Children are not the only ones who ask questions. As we grow up, we keep asking. We do this
in order to ?nd our way, to learn of dangers that we
need to avoid, or to satisfy our curiosity. But many
people seem to stop asking questions, especially the
most important ones. At least, they stop searching
for the answers.
1, 2. Why is it often good to ask questions?
8

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

3

Think about the question on the cover of this

book, the questions raised in the preface, or those
at the beginning of this chapter. These are some of
the most important questions you can ask. Yet,
many people have given up trying to ?nd the answers. Why? Does the Bible have the answers? Some
feel that its answers are too hard to understand.
Others worry that asking questions could lead to
shame or embarrassment. And some decide that
such questions are best left to religious leaders and
teachers. What about you?
4

Very likely you are interested in getting answers

to life’s big questions. No doubt you sometimes
wonder: ‘What is the purpose of life? Is this life all
there is? What is God really like?’ It is good to ask
such questions, and it is important that you do not
give up until you ?nd satisfying, reliable answers.
The famous teacher Jesus Christ said: “Keep on
asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking,
3. Why do many stop trying to ?nd answers to the questions that matter most?
4, 5. What are some of the most important questions we can ask in
life, and why should we seek the answers?
What Is the Truth About God?

9

and you will ?nd; keep on knocking, and it will be
opened to you.”—Matthew 7:7.
5

If you “keep on seeking” for answers to the im-

portant questions, you will ?nd that the search can
be very rewarding. (Proverbs 2:1-5) Despite what
other people may have told you, there are answers,
and you can ?nd them—in the Bible. The answers
are not too hard to understand. Better yet, they
bring hope and joy. And they can help you to live
a satisfying life right now. To begin, let us consider
a question that has troubled many people.
IS G OD UNCARING AND HARDHEARTED?
6 Many people think that the answer to that ques-

tion is yes. ‘If God cared,’ they reason, ‘would not
the world be a very di?erent place?’ We look around
and see a world full of war, hatred, and misery. And
as individuals, we get sick, we su?er, we lose loved
ones in death. Thus, many say, ‘If God cared about
us and our problems, would he not prevent such
things from happening?’
6. Why do many people think that God is uncaring when it comes to
human su?ering?
10

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

7

Worse yet, religious teachers sometimes lead

people to think that God is hardhearted. How so?
When tragedy strikes, they say that it is God’s will.
In e?ect, such teachers blame God for the bad
things that happen. Is that the truth about God?
What does the Bible really teach? James 1:13 answers: “When under trial, let no one say: ‘I am being tried by God.’ For with evil things God cannot
be tried, nor does he himself try anyone.” So God
is never the source of the wickedness you see in the
world around you. (Read Job 34:10-12.) Granted, he
does allow bad things to happen. But there is a big
di?erence between allowing something to happen
and causing it.
8

For example, think about a wise and loving fa-

ther with a grown son who is still living at home
with his parents. When the son becomes rebellious
7. (a) How have religious teachers led many to think that God is hardhearted? (b) What does the Bible really teach about the trials we may
su?er?
8, 9. (a) How might you illustrate the di?erence between allowing
wickedness to exist and causing it? (b) Why would it be unfair for us
to ?nd fault with God’s decision to allow mankind to pursue a wayward
course?
What Is the Truth About God?

11

and decides to leave home, his father does not stop
him. The son pursues a bad way of life and gets into
trouble. Is the father the cause of his son’s problems? No. (Luke 15:11-13) Similarly, God has not
stopped humans when they have chosen to pursue
a bad course, but he is not the cause of the problems that have resulted. Surely, then, it would be
unfair to blame God for all the troubles of mankind.
9

God has good reasons for allowing mankind to

follow a bad course. As our wise and powerful Creator, he does not have to explain his reasons to us.
Out of love, however, God does this. You will learn
more about these reasons in Chapter 11. But rest
assured that God is not responsible for the problems we face. On the contrary, he gives us the only
hope for a solution!—Isaiah 33:2.
10

Furthermore, God is holy. (Isaiah 6:3) This

means that he is pure and clean. There is no trace
of badness in him. So we can trust him completely.
10. Why can we trust that God will undo all the e?ects of wickedness?
12

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

That is more than we can say for humans, who
sometimes become corrupt. Even the most honest
human in authority often does not have the power
to undo the damage that bad people do. But God
is all-powerful. He can and will undo all the e?ects
that wickedness has had on mankind. When God
acts, he will do so in a way that will end evil forever!—Read Psalm 37:9-11.

11

HOW D OES G OD FEEL AB OUT
INJUSTICES WE FACE?
In the meantime, how does God feel about

what is going on in the world and in your life? Well,
the Bible teaches that God “loves justice.” (Psalm
37:28) So he cares deeply about what is right and
what is wrong. He hates all kinds of injustice. The
Bible says that God’s “heart was saddened” when
badness ?lled the world in times past. (Genesis 6:
5, 6) God has not changed. (Malachi 3:6) He still
hates to see the su?ering that is taking place worldwide. And God hates to see people su?er. “He cares
for you,” the Bible says.—Read 1 Peter 5:7.
11. (a) How does God feel about injustice? (b) How does God feel
about your su?ering?
What Is the Truth About God?

13

12

How can we be sure that God hates to see suf-

fering? Here is further proof. The Bible teaches that
man was made in the image of God. (Genesis 1:26)
We thus have good qualities because God has good
qualities. For example, does it bother you to see innocent people su?er? If you care about such injustices, be assured that God feels even more strongly
about them.
13

One of the best things about humans is our

ability to love. That also re?ects God. The Bible
teaches that “God is love.” (1 John 4:8) We love because God loves. Would love move you to end the
su?ering and the injustice you see in the world? If
you had the power to do that, would you do it? Of
course you would! You can be just as sure that God
will end su?ering and injustice. The promises mentioned in the preface of this book are not mere
dreams or idle hopes. God’s promises are sure to
come true! In order to put faith in such promises,
12, 13. (a) Why do we have good qualities such as love, and how does
love a?ect our view of the world? (b) Why can you be sure that God
will really do something about world problems?
14

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

though, you need to know more about the God who
has made them.

14

G OD WANTS YOU TO KNOW
WHO HE IS
If you want someone to get to know you, what

might you do? Would you not tell the person your
name? Does God have a name? Many religions answer that his name is “God” or “Lord,” but those
are not personal names. They are titles, just as
“king” and “president” are titles. The Bible teaches
that God has many titles. “God” and “Lord” are
among them. However, the Bible also teaches that
God has a personal name: Jehovah. Psalm 83:18
says: “You, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are
the Most High over all the earth.” If your Bible
translation does not contain that name, you may
want to consult the Appendix on pages 248-251 of
this book to learn why that is so. The truth is that
God’s name appears thousands of times in ancient
Bible manuscripts. So Jehovah wants you to know
his name and to use it. In a sense, he is using the
Bible to introduce himself to you.
14. What is God’s name, and why should we use it?
What Is the Truth About God?

15

God gave himself a name that is full of meaning. His name, Jehovah, means that God can ful?ll
any promise he makes and can carry out any purpose he has in mind.1 God’s name is unique, one of
a kind. It belongs only to him. In a number of ways,
Jehovah is unique. How is that so?
15

We saw that Psalm 83:18 said of Jehovah: “You
alone are the Most High.” Similarly, Jehovah alone
is referred to as “the Almighty.” Revelation 15:3
says: “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah
God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your
ways, King of eternity.” The title “the Almighty”
teaches us that Jehovah is the most powerful being
there is. His power is unmatched; it is supreme.
And the title “King of eternity” reminds us that Jehovah is unique in another sense. He alone has always existed. Psalm 90:2 says: “From everlasting to
everlasting, you are God.” That thought inspires
awe, does it not?
16

1 There is more information on the meaning and the pronunciation of God’s name in the Appendix on pages 248-251.

15. What does the name Jehovah mean?
16, 17. What may we learn about Jehovah from the following titles:
(a) “the Almighty”? (b) “King of eternity”? (c) “Creator”?
16

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jehovah is also unique in that he alone is the
Creator. Revelation 4:11 reads: “You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor
and the power, because you created all things, and
because of your will they came into existence and
were created.” Everything that you can think of
—from the invisible spirit creatures in heaven to
the stars that ?ll the night sky to the fruit that
grows on the trees to the ?sh that swim in the
oceans and rivers—all of it exists because Jehovah
is the Creator!
17

18

CAN YOU BE CLO SE TO JEHOVAH?
Reading about Jehovah’s awe-inspiring qualities

makes some people feel a little uneasy. They fear
that God is too high for them, that they could never get close to him or even matter to such a lofty
God. But is this idea correct? The Bible teaches just
the opposite. It says of Jehovah: “In fact, he is not
far o? from each one of us.” (Acts 17:27) The Bible
even urges us: “Draw close to God, and he will draw
close to you.”—James 4:8.
18. Why do some people feel that they could never get close to God,
but what does the Bible teach?
What Is the Truth About God?

17

How can you draw close to God? To begin with,
continue doing what you are doing now—learning
about God. Jesus said: “This means everlasting life,
their coming to know you, the only true God, and
the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3)
Yes, the Bible teaches that learning about Jehovah
and Jesus leads to “everlasting life”! As already noted, “God is love.” (1 John 4:16) Jehovah also has
many other beautiful and appealing qualities. For
example, the Bible says that Jehovah is “a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth.” (Exodus 34:6) He is
“good and ready to forgive.” (Psalm 86:5) God is
patient. (2 Peter 3:9) He is loyal. (Revelation 15:4)
As you read more in the Bible, you will see how Jehovah has shown that he has these and many other
appealing qualities.
19

True, you cannot see God because he is an invisible Spirit. (John 1:18; 4:24; 1 Timothy 1:17) By
20

19. (a) How can we begin to draw close to God, and with what bene?t? (b) What qualities of God are most appealing to you?
20-22. (a) Does our inability to see God prevent us from getting close
to him? Explain. (b) What may some well-meaning people urge you to
do, but what should you do?
18

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

learning about him through the pages of the Bible,
however, you can come to know him as a Person.
As the psalmist said, you can “gaze upon the pleasantness of Jehovah.” (Psalm 27:4; Romans 1:20) The
more you learn about Jehovah, the more real he will
become to you and the more reason you will have
to love him and feel close to him.
You will come to understand why the Bible
teaches us to think of Jehovah as our Father. (Matthew 6:9) Not only does our life come from him but
he wants the best life possible for us—just as any
loving father would want for his children. (Psalm
36:9) The Bible also teaches that humans can become Jehovah’s friends. (James 2:23) Imagine—you
can become a friend of the Creator of the universe!
21

As you learn more from the Bible, you may ?nd
that some well-meaning people will urge you to
stop such studies. They may worry that you will
change your beliefs. But do not let anyone stop you
from forming the best friendship you can ever have.
22

23

Of course, there will be things that you do not

23, 24. (a) Why should you continue to ask questions about what you
are learning? (b) What is the subject of the next chapter?
What Is the Truth About God?

19

understand at ?rst. It can be a little humbling to
ask for help, but do not hold back because of embarrassment. Jesus said that it is good to be humble, like a little child. (Matthew 18:2-4) And children, as we know, ask a lot of questions. God wants
you to ?nd the answers. The Bible praises some who
were eager to learn about God. They checked carefully in the Scriptures to make sure that what they
were learning was the truth.—Read Acts 17:11.
24

The best way to learn about Jehovah is to ex-

amine the Bible. It is di?erent from any other book.
In what way? The next chapter will consider that
subject.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? God cares about you personally.—1 Peter 5:7.
? God’s personal name is Jehovah.
—Psalm 83:18.
? Jehovah invites you to draw close to him.
—James 4:8.
? Jehovah is loving and merciful.
—Exodus 34:6; 1 John 4:8, 16.
20

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER TWO

The Bible—A Book From God
In what ways is the Bible di?erent
from any other book?
How can the Bible help you cope
with personal problems?
Why can you trust the prophecies
recorded in the Bible?
CAN you recall a time when you received a ?ne gift
from a dear friend? Likely, the experience was not
only exciting but also heartwarming. After all, a gift
tells you something about the giver—that he or she
values your friendship. No doubt you expressed gratitude for your friend’s thoughtful gift.
The Bible is a gift from God, one for which we can
be truly grateful. This unique book reveals things
that we could never ?nd out otherwise. For example,
it tells us about the creation of the starry heavens, the
earth, and the ?rst man and woman. The Bible contains reliable principles to help us cope with life’s
2

1, 2. In what ways is the Bible an exciting gift from God?
The Bible—A Book From God

21

problems and anxieties. It explains how God will ful?ll his purpose and bring about better conditions on
the earth. What an exciting gift the Bible is!
3

The Bible is also a heartwarming gift, for it reveals

something about the Giver, Jehovah God. The fact
that he has provided such a book is proof that he
wants us to get to know him well. Indeed, the Bible
can help you to draw close to Jehovah.
4

If you have a copy of the Bible, you are far from

alone. In whole or in part, the Bible has been published in about 2,600 languages and thus is available
to more than 90 percent of the world’s population.
On the average, more than a million Bibles are distributed each week! Billions of copies of either the
whole Bible or part of it have been produced. Surely, there is no other book like the Bible.
5

Furthermore, the Bible is “inspired of God.” (Read

2 Timothy 3:16.) In what way? The Bible itself answers: “Men spoke from God as they were moved by
3. What does the provision of the Bible tell us about Jehovah, and why
is this heartwarming?
4. What impresses you about the distribution of the Bible?
5. In what way is the Bible “inspired of God”?
22

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

holy spirit.” (2 Peter 1:21) To illustrate: A businessman might have a secretary write a letter. That letter contains the businessman’s thoughts and instructions. Hence, it is really his letter, not the secretary’s.
In a similar way, the Bible contains God’s message,
not that of the men who wrote it down. Thus, the entire Bible truthfully is “the word of God.”—1 Thessalonians 2:13.
6

HARMONIOUS AND ACCURATE
The Bible was written over a 1,600-year period. Its

writers lived at di?erent times and came from many
walks of life. Some were farmers, ?shermen, and
shepherds. Others were prophets, judges, and kings.
The Gospel writer Luke was a doctor. Despite the
varied backgrounds of its writers, the Bible is harmonious from beginning to end.1
7

The ?rst book of the Bible tells us how mankind’s

problems began. The last book shows that the whole
1 Although some people say that certain parts of the Bible contradict other parts of it, such claims are unfounded. See chapter 7
of the book The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? published by Jehovah’s
Witnesses.

6, 7. Why is the harmony of the material in the Bible particularly
noteworthy?
The Bible—A Book From God

23

earth will become a paradise, or garden. All the material in the Bible covers thousands of years of history and relates in some way to the unfolding of God’s
purpose. The harmony of the Bible is impressive, but
that is what we would expect of a book from God.
The Bible is scienti?cally accurate. It even contains information that was far ahead of its time. For
example, the book of Leviticus contained laws for ancient Israel on quarantine and hygiene when surrounding nations knew nothing about such matters.
At a time when there were wrong ideas about the
shape of the earth, the Bible referred to it as a circle,
or sphere. (Isaiah 40:22) The Bible accurately said
that the earth is suspended “upon nothing.” (Job
26:7) Of course, the Bible is not a science textbook.
But when it touches on scienti?c matters, it is accurate. Is this not what we would expect of a book from
God?
8

The Bible is also historically accurate and reliable.
Its accounts are speci?c. They include not only the
9

8. Give examples showing that the Bible is scienti?cally accurate.
9. (a) In what ways does the Bible show itself to be historically accurate and reliable? (b) What does the honesty of its writers tell you
about the Bible?
24

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

names but also the ancestry of individuals.1 In contrast to secular historians, who often do not mention
the defeats of their own people, Bible writers were
honest, even recording their own failings and those
of their nation. In the Bible book of Numbers, for instance, the writer Moses admits his own serious error for which he was severely reproved. (Numbers 20:
2-12) Such honesty is rare in other historical accounts
but is found in the Bible because it is a book from
God.
10

A B O OK OF PRACTICAL WISD OM
Because the Bible is inspired of God, it is “bene-

?cial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things
straight.” (2 Timothy 3:16) Yes, the Bible is a practical book. It re?ects a keen understanding of human
nature. No wonder, for its Author, Jehovah God, is
the Creator! He understands our thinking and emotions better than we do. Furthermore, Jehovah knows
what we need in order to be happy. He also knows
what pathways we should avoid.
1 For example, note the detailed ancestral line of Jesus set out at
Luke 3:23-38.

10. Why is it not surprising that the Bible is a practical book?
The Bible—A Book From God

25

Consider Jesus’ speech called the Sermon on the
Mount, recorded in Matthew chapters 5 to 7. In this
masterpiece of teaching, Jesus spoke on a number of
topics, including the way to ?nd true happiness, how
to settle disputes, how to pray, and how to have the
proper view of material things. Jesus’ words are just
as powerful and practical today as they were when he
spoke them.
11

Some Bible principles deal with family life, work
habits, and relationships with others. The Bible’s
principles apply to all people, and its counsel is always bene?cial. The wisdom found in the Bible is
summarized by God’s words through the prophet Isaiah: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you
to bene?t yourself.”—Isaiah 48:17.
12

A B O OK OF PROPHECY
13 The Bible contains numerous prophecies, many
of which have already been ful?lled. Consider an example. Through the prophet Isaiah, who lived in the
11, 12. (a) What topics did Jesus discuss in his Sermon on the
Mount? (b) What other practical matters are considered in the Bible,
and why is its counsel timeless?
13. What details did Jehovah inspire the prophet Isaiah to record regarding Babylon?
26

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

eighth century B.C.E., Jehovah foretold that the city
of Babylon would be destroyed. (Isaiah 13:19; 14:22,
23) Details were given to show just how the city
would be conquered. Invading armies would dry up
Babylon’s river and march into the city without a battle. That is not all. Isaiah’s prophecy even named the
king who would conquer Babylon—Cyrus.—Read Isaiah 44:27–45:2.
Some 200 years later—on the night of October 5/6, 539 B.C.E.—an army encamped near Babylon. Who was its commander? A Persian king named
Cyrus. The stage was thus set for the ful?llment of
an amazing prophecy. But would the army of Cyrus
invade Babylon without a battle, as foretold?
14

The Babylonians were holding a festival that
night and felt secure behind their massive city walls.
Meanwhile, Cyrus cleverly diverted the water of the
river that ?owed through the city. Soon the water
was shallow enough for his men to cross the riverbed
and approach the walls of the city. But how would Cyrus’ army get past Babylon’s walls? For some reason,
15

14, 15. How were some details of Isaiah’s prophecy about Babylon
ful?lled?
The Bible—A Book From God

27

on that night the doors to the city were carelessly left
open!
Regarding Babylon, it was foretold: “She will never be inhabited, nor will she be a place to reside in
throughout all generations. No Arab will pitch his
tent there, and no shepherds will rest their ?ocks
there.” (Isaiah 13:20) This prophecy did more than
predict a city’s fall. It showed that Babylon would be
desolated permanently. You can see evidence of the
ful?llment of these words. The uninhabited site of ancient Babylon—about 50 miles south of Baghdad,
Iraq—is proof that what Jehovah spoke through Isaiah has been ful?lled: “I will sweep her with the
broom of annihilation.”—Isaiah 14:22, 23.1
16

Considering how the Bible is a book of reliable
prophecy is faith strengthening, is it not? After all, if
Jehovah God has ful?lled his past promises, we have
every reason to be con?dent that he will also ful?ll
his promise of a paradise earth. (Read Numbers 23:19.)
17

1 For more information on Bible prophecy, see pages 27-29 of the
brochure A Book for All People, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

16. (a) What did Isaiah foretell about the ?nal outcome of Babylon?
(b) How was Isaiah’s prophecy about Babylon’s desolation ful?lled?
17. How is the ful?llment of Bible prophecy faith strengthening?
28

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Indeed, we have “hope of the everlasting life that
God, who cannot lie, promised long ago.”—Titus 1:2.1
18

“THE WORD OF G OD IS ALIVE”
From what we have considered in this chapter, it

is clear that the Bible is truly a unique book. Yet,
its value extends far beyond its internal harmony,
scienti?c and historical accuracy, practical wisdom,
and reliable prophecy. The Christian apostle Paul
wrote: “The word of God is alive and exerts power
and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces
even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints
from the marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and
intentions of the heart.”—Hebrews 4:12.
19

Reading God’s “word,” or message, in the Bi-

ble can change our life. It can help us to examine
1 The destruction of Babylon is just one example of ful?lled Bible
prophecy. Other examples include the destruction of Tyre and Nineveh. (Ezekiel 26:1-5; Zephaniah 2:13-15) Also, Daniel’s prophecy
foretold a succession of world empires that would come into power after Babylon. These included Medo-Persia and Greece. (Daniel
8:5-7, 20-22) See the Appendix, pages 254-256, for a discussion of
the many Messianic prophecies that were ful?lled in Jesus Christ.

18. What powerful statement does the Christian apostle Paul make
about “the word of God”?
19, 20. (a) How can the Bible help you to examine yourself? (b) How
can you show your gratitude for God’s unique gift, the Bible?
The Bible—A Book From God

29

ourselves as never before. We may claim to love God,
but how we react to what his inspired Word, the Bible, teaches will reveal our true thoughts, even the
very intentions of the heart.
The Bible truly is a book from God. It is a book
that is to be read, studied, and loved. Show your gratitude for this divine gift by continuing to peer into
its contents. As you do so, you will gain a deep appreciation of God’s purpose for mankind. Just what that
purpose is and how it will be realized will be discussed in the following chapter.
20

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? The Bible is inspired of God and thus is
accurate and reliable.—2 Timothy 3:16.
? The information found in God’s Word is practical for everyday life.—Isaiah 48:17.
? God’s promises found in the Bible are certain
to be ful?lled.—Numbers 23:19.

30

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER THREE

What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?
What is God’s purpose for mankind?
How has God been challenged?
What will life on earth be like in the future?
GOD’S purpose for the earth is really wonderful.
Jehovah wants the earth to be ?lled with happy,
healthy people. The Bible says that “Jehovah God
planted a garden in Eden” and that he “made to
grow . . . every tree that was pleasing to look at and
good for food.” After God created the ?rst man and
woman, Adam and Eve, He put them in that lovely home and told them: “Be fruitful and become
many, ?ll the earth and subdue it.” (Genesis 1:28;
2:8, 9, 15) So it was God’s purpose that humans
have children, extend the boundaries of that garden
home earth wide, and take care of the animals.
2 Do you think that Jehovah God’s purpose for
1. What is God’s purpose for the earth?
2. (a) How do we know that God’s purpose for the earth will be ful?lled? (b) What does the Bible say about humans living forever?
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

31

people to live in an earthly paradise will ever be realized? “I have spoken,” God declares, “and I will
also carry it out.” (Isaiah 46:9-11; 55:11) Yes, what
God purposes he will surely do! He says that he
“did not create [the earth] simply for nothing, but
formed it to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18) What kind
of people did God want to live on the earth? And
for how long did he want them to live here? The
Bible answers: “The righteous will possess the earth,
and they will live forever on it.”—Psalm 37:29; Revelation 21:3, 4.
3 Obviously, this has not happened yet. People now
get sick and die; they even ?ght and kill one another. Something went wrong. Surely, however, God did
not purpose that the earth should be as we see it today! What happened? Why has God’s purpose not
been ful?lled? No history book written by man can
tell us because the trouble started in heaven.
4

THE ORIGIN OF AN ENEMY
The ?rst book of the Bible tells of an opposer of

3. What sad conditions now exist on earth, and what questions does
this raise?
4, 5. (a) Who actually spoke to Eve by means of a serpent? (b) How
might a formerly decent, honest person become a thief?
32

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

God who showed up in the garden of Eden. He is
described as “the serpent,” but he was not a mere
animal. The last book of the Bible identi?es him as
“the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.” He is also called
“the original serpent.” (Genesis 3:1; Revelation 12:9)
This powerful angel, or invisible spirit creature,
used a serpent to speak to Eve, even as a skilled
person can make it seem that his voice is coming
from a nearby doll or dummy. That spirit person
had no doubt been present when God prepared the
earth for humans.—Job 38:4, 7.
5

Since all of Jehovah’s creations are perfect, how-

ever, who made this “Devil,” this “Satan”? Put simply, one of the powerful spirit sons of God turned himself into the Devil. How was this possible? Well,
today a person who was once decent and honest
may become a thief. How does that happen? The
person may allow a wrong desire to develop in his
heart. If he keeps thinking about it, that wrong desire may become very strong. Then if the opportunity presents itself, he may act upon the bad desire
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

33

that he has been thinking about.—Read James 1:
13-15.
This happened in the case of Satan the Devil.
He apparently heard God tell Adam and Eve to
6

have children and to ?ll the earth with their o?spring. (Genesis 1:27, 28) ‘Why, all these humans
could worship me rather than God!’ Satan evidently thought. So a wrong desire built up in his heart.
Eventually, he took action to deceive Eve by telling
her lies about God. (Read Genesis 3:1-5.) He thus became a “Devil,” which means “Slanderer.” At the
same time, he became “Satan,” which means “Opposer.”
By using lies and trickery, Satan the Devil
caused Adam and Eve to disobey God. (Genesis 2:
17; 3:6) As a result, they eventually died, as God
had said they would if they disobeyed. (Genesis
3:17-19) Since Adam became imperfect when he
sinned, all his o?spring inherited sin from him.
(Read Romans 5:12.) The situation might be illustrat7

6. How did a powerful spirit son of God become Satan the Devil?
7. (a) Why did Adam and Eve die? (b) Why do all of Adam’s o?spring
grow old and die?
34

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

ed with a pan used for baking bread. If the pan has
a dent in it, what happens to each loaf of bread
made in the pan? Each loaf has a dent, or an imperfection, in it. Similarly, each human has inherited a
“dent” of imperfection from Adam. That is why all
humans grow old and die.—Romans 3:23.
When Satan led Adam and Eve into sinning
against God, he was really leading a rebellion. He
was challenging Jehovah’s way of ruling. In e?ect,
Satan was saying: ‘God is a bad ruler. He tells lies
and holds back good things from his subjects. Humans do not need to have God ruling over them.
They can decide for themselves what is good and
what is bad. And they will be better o? under my
rulership.’ How would God handle such an insulting challenge? Some think that God should simply
have put the rebels to death. But would that have
answered Satan’s challenge? Would it have proved
that God’s way of ruling is right?
8

Jehovah’s perfect sense of justice would not allow him to put the rebels to death right away. He
9

8, 9. (a) What challenge did Satan evidently make? (b) Why did God
not destroy the rebels immediately?
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

35

decided that time was needed to answer Satan’s
challenge in a satisfying way and to prove that the
Devil is a liar. So God determined that he would
permit humans to rule themselves for some time
under Satan’s in?uence. Why Jehovah did that and
why he has allowed so much time to pass before settling these issues will be discussed in Chapter 11 of
this book. Now, though, it is good to think about
this: Were Adam and Eve right to believe Satan,
who had never done anything good for them? Was
it right for them to believe that Jehovah, who had
given them everything they had, is a cruel liar?
What would you have done?
10

It is good to think about these questions be-

cause each of us faces similar issues today. Yes, you
have the opportunity to support Jehovah’s side in
answer to Satan’s challenge. You can accept Jehovah as your Ruler and help to show that Satan is a
liar. (Psalm 73:28; read Proverbs 27:11.) Sadly, only
a few among the billions of people in this world
10. How can you support Jehovah’s side in answer to Satan’s challenge?
36

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

make such a choice. This raises an important question, Does the Bible really teach that Satan rules
this world?
11

WHO RULES THIS WORLD?
Jesus never doubted that Satan is the ruler of

this world. In some miraculous way, Satan once
showed Jesus “all the kingdoms of the world and
their glory.” Satan then promised Jesus: “All these
things I will give you if you fall down and do an act
of worship to me.” (Matthew 4:8, 9; Luke 4:5, 6)
Think about this. Would that o?er have been a
temptation to Jesus if Satan was not the ruler of
these kingdoms? Jesus did not deny that all these
worldly governments were Satan’s. Surely, Jesus
would have done that if Satan was not the power
behind them.
Of course, Jehovah is the almighty God, the
Creator of the marvelous universe. (Revelation 4:
11) Yet, nowhere does the Bible say that either Je12

hovah God or Jesus Christ is ruler of this world. In
11, 12. (a) How does a temptation of Jesus reveal that Satan is the
ruler of this world? (b) What else proves that Satan is the ruler of this
world?
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

37

fact, Jesus speci?cally referred to Satan as “the ruler of this world.” (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11) The Bible even refers to Satan the Devil as “the god of
this system of things.” (2 Corinthians 4:3, 4) Regarding this opposer, or Satan, the Christian apostle John wrote: “The whole world is lying in the
power of the wicked one.”—1 John 5:19.
HOW SATAN’S WORLD WILL BE REMOVED
13 With each passing year, the world is becoming

more and more dangerous. It is overrun with warring armies, dishonest politicians, hypocritical religious leaders, and hardened criminals. The world as
a whole is beyond reform. The Bible reveals that the
time is near when God will eliminate the wicked
world during his war of Armageddon. This will
make way for a righteous new world.—Revelation
16:14-16.
Jehovah God selected Jesus Christ to be Ruler
of His heavenly Kingdom, or government. Long
14

ago, the Bible foretold: “A child has been born to
13. Why is there a need for a new world?
14. Whom has God selected to be Ruler of His Kingdom, and how was
this foretold?
38

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

us, a son has been given to us; and the government
will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called
. . . Prince of Peace. To the increase of his government and to peace, there will be no end.” (Isaiah 9:
6, 7, footnote) Regarding this government, Jesus
taught his followers to pray: “Let your Kingdom
come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on
earth.” (Matthew 6:10) As we will see later in this
book, God’s Kingdom will soon remove all the governments of this world, and it itself will replace all
of them. (Read Daniel 2:44.) Then God’s Kingdom
will usher in an earthly paradise.
15

A NEW WORLD IS AT HAND!
The Bible assures us: “There are new heavens

and a new earth that we are awaiting according to
[God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to
dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13; Isaiah 65:17) Sometimes when
the Bible speaks of “the earth,” it means the people who live on the earth. (Genesis 11:1) So the
righteous “new earth” is a society of people who receive God’s approval.
15. What is the “new earth”?
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

39

16

Jesus promised that in the coming new world,

those approved by God would receive the gift of
“everlasting life.” (Mark 10:30) Please open your Bible to John 3:16 and 17:3, and read what Jesus said
we must do to receive everlasting life. Now consider from the Bible the blessings that will be enjoyed
by those who qualify for that wonderful gift from
God in the coming earthly Paradise.
17

Wickedness, warfare, crime, and violence will be

gone. “The wicked will be no more . . . But the meek
will possess the earth.” (Psalm 37:10, 11) Peace
will exist because ‘God will bring an end to wars
throughout the earth.’ (Psalm 46:9; Isaiah 2:4) Then
“the righteous will ?ourish, and peace will abound
until the moon is no more”—and that means forever!—Psalm 72:7.
18

Jehovah’s worshippers will live in security. As long

as the Israelites in Bible times obeyed God, they
lived in security. (Leviticus 25:18, 19) How wonder16. What is a priceless gift from God to those whom he approves, and
what must we do to receive it?
17, 18. How can we be sure that there will be peace and security
everywhere on earth?
40

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

ful it will be to enjoy similar security in Paradise!
—Read Isaiah 32:18; Micah 4:4.
19

Food shortages will not exist. “There will be an

abundance of grain on the earth,” sang the psalmist. “On the top of the mountains it will over?ow.”
(Psalm 72:16) Jehovah God will bless his righteous ones, and “the earth will give its produce.”
—Psalm 67:6.
20

The whole earth will become a paradise. Lovely

new homes and gardens will occupy land that had
once been ruined by sinful humans. (Read Isaiah
65:21-24; Revelation 11:18) As time passes, parts of
the earth already subdued will expand until the
whole globe is as beautiful and productive as the
garden of Eden. And God will never fail to “open
[his] hand and satisfy the desire of every living
thing.”—Psalm 145:16.
21

There will be peace between humans and animals.

Wild and domestic animals will feed together. Even
19. Why do we know that food will be abundant in God’s new world?
20. Why can we be sure that the whole earth will become a paradise?
21. What shows that peace will exist between humans and animals?
What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

41

a little child will have nothing to fear from animals
that are now dangerous.—Read Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:25.
22 Sickness will vanish. As Ruler of God’s heavenly
Kingdom, Jesus will do healing on a far grander
scale than when he was on earth. (Matthew 9:35;
Mark 1:40-42; John 5:5-9) Then “no resident will
say: ‘I am sick.’ ”—Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6.
23 Dead loved ones will be restored to life with the
prospect of never dying. All those sleeping in death
who are in God’s memory will be brought back to
life. In fact, “there is going to be a resurrection of
both the righteous and the unrighteous.”—Acts 24:
15; read John 5:28, 29.
24 What a marvelous future awaits those who
choose to learn about our Grand Creator, Jehovah
God, and to serve him! It was to the coming Paradise on earth that Jesus pointed when he promised
the criminal who died alongside him: “You will be
with me in Paradise.” (Luke 23:43) It is vital that
we learn more about Jesus Christ, through whom
all these blessings will be made possible.
22. What will happen to sickness?
23. Why will the resurrection bring joy to our hearts?
24. How do you feel about living in Paradise on earth?
42

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? God’s purpose to make the earth a paradise
will be ful?lled.—Isaiah 45:18; 55:11.
? Satan now rules this world.—John 12:31;
1 John 5:19.
? In the coming new world, God will bestow
many blessings on mankind.
—Psalm 37:10, 11, 29.

What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

43

CHAPTER FOUR

Who Is Jesus Christ?
What is Jesus’ special role?
Where did he come from?
What kind of person was he?
THERE are many famous people in the world.
Some are well-known in their own community, city,
or country. Others are known worldwide. However,
just knowing the name of someone famous does not
mean that you truly know him. It does not mean
that you know details about his background and
what he is really like as a person.
2

People around the world have heard something

about Jesus Christ, even though he lived on earth
some 2,000 years ago. Yet, many are confused about
who Jesus really was. Some say that he was merely
a good man. Others claim that he was nothing more
1, 2. (a) Why does knowing about someone famous not mean that you
truly know him? (b) What confusion is there about Jesus?
44

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

than a prophet. Still others believe that Jesus is
God and should be worshipped. Should he?
It is important for you to know the truth about
Jesus. Why? Because the Bible says: “This means
everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only
true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”
(John 17:3) Yes, really coming to know Jehovah
God and Jesus Christ can lead to everlasting life on
a paradise earth. (John 14:6) Furthermore, Jesus
sets the best example of how to live and how to
treat others. (John 13:34, 35) In the ?rst chapter of
this book, we discussed the truth about God. Now
let us consider what the Bible really teaches about
Jesus Christ.
3

4

THE PROMISED MES SIAH
Long before Jesus was born, the Bible foretold

the coming of the one whom God would send as the
Messiah, or Christ. The titles “Messiah” (from a
Hebrew word) and “Christ” (from a Greek word)
both mean “Anointed One.” This promised One
would be anointed, that is, appointed by God to a
3. Why is it important for you to know Jehovah God and Jesus Christ?
4. What do the titles “Messiah” and “Christ” mean?
Who Is Jesus Christ?

45

special position. In later chapters of this book,
we will learn more about the Messiah’s important
place in the ful?llment of God’s promises. We will
also learn about the blessings that Jesus can bring
us even now. Before Jesus was born, however, many
no doubt wondered, ‘Who will prove to be the Messiah?’
In the ?rst century C.E., the disciples of Jesus
of Nazareth were fully convinced that he was the
foretold Messiah. (John 1:41) One of the disciples,
a man named Simon Peter, openly said to Jesus:
“You are the Christ.” (Matthew 16:16) How, though,
could those disciples be sure—and how can we be
5

sure—that Jesus really is the promised Messiah?
The prophets of God who lived before Jesus
foretold many details about the Messiah. These details would help others to identify him. We might illustrate things this way: Suppose you were asked to
go to a busy bus depot or a train station or an airport to pick up someone you had never met before.
6

5. Of what were the disciples of Jesus fully convinced regarding him?
6. Illustrate how Jehovah has helped faithful ones to identify the Messiah.
46

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Would it not help if someone gave you a few details
about him? Similarly, by means of the Bible prophets, Jehovah gave a rather detailed description of
what the Messiah would do and what he would experience. The ful?llment of these many prophecies
would help faithful ones to identify him clearly.
Consider just two examples. First, over 700
years in advance, the prophet Micah foretold that
the promised One would be born in Bethlehem, a
small town in the land of Judah. (Micah 5:2) Where
was Jesus actually born? Why, in that very town!
(Matthew 2:1, 3-9) Second, many centuries in advance, the prophecy recorded at Daniel 9:25 pointed to the very year when the Messiah was to appear
—29 C.E.1 The ful?llment of these and other prophecies proves that Jesus was the promised Messiah.
7

Further proof that Jesus was the Messiah became clear near the end of 29 C.E. That is the
8

1 For an explanation of Daniel’s prophecy ful?lled in connection
with Jesus, see the Appendix, pages 252-254.

7. What are two of the prophecies that were ful?lled in connection
with Jesus?
8, 9. What proof that Jesus was the Messiah became clear at his baptism?
Who Is Jesus Christ?

47

year when Jesus went to John the Baptizer to be
baptized in the Jordan River. Jehovah had promised
John a sign so that he could identify the Messiah.
John saw that sign at Jesus’ baptism. The Bible says
that this is what happened: “After being baptized,
Jesus immediately came up from the water; and
look! the heavens were opened up, and he saw
God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming
upon him. Look! Also, a voice from the heavens
said: ‘This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.’ ” (Matthew 3:16, 17) After seeing and hearing what happened, John had no doubt that Jesus
was sent by God. (John 1:32-34) At the moment
when God’s spirit, or active force, was poured out
upon him that day, Jesus became the Messiah, or
Christ, the one appointed to be Leader and King.
—Isaiah 55:4.
9 The ful?llment of Bible prophecy and Jehovah God’s own testimony plainly show that Jesus
was the promised Messiah. But the Bible answers
two other important questions about Jesus Christ:
Where did he come from, and what kind of person
was he?
48

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

10

WHERE DID JESUS COME FROM?
The Bible teaches that Jesus lived in heaven be-

fore he came to earth. Micah prophesied that the
Messiah would be born in Bethlehem and also said
that His origin was “from ancient times.” (Micah
5:2) On many occasions, Jesus himself said that he
lived in heaven before being born as a human. (Read
John 3:13; 6:38, 62; 17:4, 5) As a spirit creature in
heaven, Jesus had a special relationship with Jehovah.
Jesus is Jehovah’s most precious Son—and for
good reason. He is called “the ?rstborn of all creation,” for he was God’s ?rst creation.1 (Colossians
1:15) There is something else that makes this Son
special. He is the “only-begotten Son.” (John 3:16)
This means that Jesus is the only one directly creat11

ed by God. Jesus is also the only one whom God
1 Jehovah is called a Father because he is the Creator. (Isaiah
64:8) Since Jesus was created by God, he is called God’s Son. For
similar reasons, other spirit creatures and even the man Adam are
called sons of God.—Job 1:6; Luke 3:38.

10. What does the Bible teach about Jesus’ existence before he came
to earth?
11. How does the Bible show that Jesus is Jehovah’s most precious
Son?
Who Is Jesus Christ?

49

used when He created all other things. (Colossians
1:16) Then, too, Jesus is called “the Word.” (John
1:14) This tells us that he spoke for God, no doubt
delivering messages and instructions to the Father’s
other sons, both spirit and human.
12

Is the ?rstborn Son equal to God, as some be-

lieve? That is not what the Bible teaches. As we noted in the preceding paragraph, the Son was created. Obviously, then, he had a beginning, whereas
Jehovah God has no beginning or end. (Psalm 90:2)
The only-begotten Son never even considered trying
to be equal to his Father. The Bible clearly teaches
that the Father is greater than the Son. (Read John
14:28; 1 Corinthians 11:3) Jehovah alone is “God
Almighty.” (Genesis 17:1) Therefore, he has no
equal.1
13

Jehovah and his ?rstborn Son enjoyed close as-

sociation for billions of years—long before the star1 For further proof that the ?rstborn Son is not equal to God, see
the Appendix, pages 257-260.

12. How do we know that the ?rstborn Son is not equal to God?
13. What does the Bible mean when it refers to the Son as “the image of the invisible God”?
50

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

ry heavens and the earth were created. How they
must have loved each other! (John 3:35; 14:31) This
dear Son was just like his Father. That is why the
Bible refers to the Son as “the image of the invisible God.” (Colossians 1:15) Yes, even as a human
son may closely resemble his father in various ways,
this heavenly Son re?ected his Father’s qualities
and personality.
Jehovah’s only-begotten Son willingly left heaven and came down to earth to live as a human. But
you may wonder, ‘How was it possible for a spirit
creature to be born as a human?’ To accomplish
this, Jehovah performed a miracle. He transferred
the life of his ?rstborn Son from heaven to the
womb of a Jewish virgin named Mary. No human
father was involved. Mary thus gave birth to a perfect son and named him Jesus.—Luke 1:30-35.
14

15

WHAT KIND OF PERS ON WAS JESUS?
What Jesus said and did while on earth helps

us to get to know him well. More than that, through
14. How did Jehovah’s only-begotten Son come to be born as a human?
15. Why can we say that through Jesus we come to know Jehovah better?
Who Is Jesus Christ?

51

Jesus we come to know Jehovah better. Why is this
the case? Recall that this Son is a perfect re?ection
of his Father. That is why Jesus told one of his disciples: “Whoever has seen me has seen the Father
also.” (John 14:9) The four Bible books known as
the Gospels—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John—tell
us much about the life, activity, and personal qualities of Jesus Christ.
Jesus was well-known as “Teacher.” (John 1:
38; 13:13) What did he teach? Primarily, his message was “the good news of the Kingdom”—that
is, God’s Kingdom, the heavenly government that
will rule over the entire earth and will bring endless blessings to obedient humans. (Matthew 4:23)
Whose message was this? Jesus himself said: “What
I teach is not mine, but belongs to him who sent
me,” namely, Jehovah. (John 7:16) Jesus knew that
his Father wants humans to hear about the good
news of the Kingdom. In Chapter 8, we will learn
more about God’s Kingdom and what it will accomplish.
16

16. What was Jesus’ primary message, and where did his teachings
come from?
52

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Where did Jesus do his teaching? Everywhere
he found people—in the countryside as well as in
17

cities, in villages, in marketplaces, and in their
homes. Jesus did not expect people to come to him.
He went to them. (Mark 6:56; Luke 19:5, 6) Why did
Jesus go to such lengths and spend so much of his
time preaching and teaching? Because doing so was
God’s will for him. Jesus always did his Father’s
will. (John 8:28, 29) But there was another reason
why he preached. He felt compassion for the crowds
of people who came out to see him. (Read Matthew
9:35, 36.) They were neglected by their religious
leaders, who should have been teaching them the
truth about God and his purposes. Jesus knew how
much the people needed to hear the Kingdom message.
Jesus was a man of tender warmth and deep
feelings. Others thus found him to be approachable and kind. Even children felt at ease with
18

him. (Mark 10:13-16) Jesus was impartial. He hated
17. Where did Jesus do his teaching, and why did he go to great
lengths to teach others?
18. What qualities of Jesus do you ?nd most appealing?
Who Is Jesus Christ?

53

corruption and injustice. (Matthew 21:12, 13) At a
time when women received little respect and had
few privileges, he treated them with dignity. (John
4:9, 27) Jesus was genuinely humble. On one occasion, he washed the feet of his apostles, a service
usually performed by a lowly servant.
Jesus was sensitive to the needs of others. This
was especially evident when, under the power of
God’s spirit, he performed miracles of healing.
(Matthew 14:14) For example, a man with leprosy
came to Jesus and said: “If you just want to, you
can make me clean.” Jesus personally felt this man’s
pain and su?ering. Moved with pity, Jesus stretched
out his hand and touched the man, saying: “I want
to! Be made clean.” And the sick man was healed!
(Mark 1:40-42) Can you imagine how that man
must have felt?
19

20

FAITHFUL TO THE END
Jesus set the ?nest example of loyal obedience

to God. He remained faithful to his heavenly Father
19. What example shows that Jesus was sensitive to the needs of
others?
20, 21. How did Jesus set an example of loyal obedience to God?
54

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

under all kinds of circumstances and despite all
types of opposition and su?ering. Jesus ?rmly and
successfully resisted Satan’s temptations. (Matthew
4:1-11) At one time, some of Jesus’ own relatives did
not put faith in him, even saying that he was “out
of his mind.” (Mark 3:21) But Jesus did not let
them in?uence him; he kept right on doing God’s
work. Despite insults and abuse, Jesus maintained
self-control, never trying to harm his opposers.
—1 Peter 2:21-23.
21

Jesus remained faithful until death—a cruel

and painful death at the hands of his enemies. (Read
Philippians 2:8.) Consider what he endured on the
last day of his life as a human. He was arrested,
accused by false witnesses, convicted by corrupt
judges, laughed at by mobs, and tortured by soldiers. Nailed to a stake, he took his last breath, crying out: “It has been accomplished!” (John 19:30)
However, on the third day after Jesus died, his heavenly Father resurrected him back to spirit life.
(1 Peter 3:18) A few weeks later, he returned to
heaven. There, he “sat down at the right hand of
Who Is Jesus Christ?

55

God” and waited to receive kingly power.—Hebrews 10:12, 13.
What did Jesus accomplish by remaining faithful until death? Jesus’ death actually opens to us
the opportunity for eternal life on a paradise earth,
in harmony with Jehovah’s original purpose. How
Jesus’ death makes that possible will be discussed
in the next chapter.
22

22. What did Jesus accomplish by remaining faithful until death?

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Ful?lled prophecy and God’s own testimony
prove that Jesus is the Messiah, or Christ.
—Matthew 16:16.
? Jesus lived in heaven as a spirit creature long
before he came to earth.—John 3:13.
? Jesus was a teacher, a man of tender warmth,
and an example of perfect obedience to God.
—Matthew 9:35, 36.

56

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER FIVE

The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift
What is the ransom?
How was it provided?
What can it mean for you?
How can you show that you
appreciate it?
WHAT is the greatest gift you have ever received?
A gift does not have to be expensive to be important. After all, the true value of a gift is not necessarily measured in terms of money. Rather, when a
gift brings you happiness or ?lls a real need in your
life, it has great value to you personally.
Of the many gifts you could ever hope to receive, there is one that stands out above all others.
It is a gift from God to mankind. Jehovah has given us many things, but his greatest gift to us is the
ransom sacri?ce of his Son, Jesus Christ. (Read
2

1, 2. (a) When does a gift have great value to you personally?
(b) Why can it be said that the ransom is the most valuable gift you
could ever receive?
The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

57

Matthew 20:28.) As we will see in this chapter, the
ransom is the most valuable gift you could possibly
receive, for it can bring you untold happiness and
can ?ll your most important needs. The ransom is
really the greatest expression of Jehovah’s love for
you.
3

WHAT IS THE RANS OM?
Put simply, the ransom is Jehovah’s means to

deliver, or save, humankind from sin and death.
(Ephesians 1:7) To grasp the meaning of this Bible
teaching, we need to think back to what happened
in the garden of Eden. Only if we understand what
Adam lost when he sinned can we appreciate why
the ransom is such a valuable gift to us.
When he created Adam, Jehovah gave him something truly precious—perfect human life. Consider
what that meant for Adam. Made with a perfect
body and mind, he would never get sick, grow old,
or die. As a perfect human, he had a special rela4

tionship with Jehovah. The Bible says that Adam
3. What is the ransom, and what do we need to understand in order to
appreciate this valuable gift?
4. What did perfect human life mean for Adam?
58

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

was a “son of God.” (Luke 3:38) So Adam enjoyed
a close relationship with Jehovah God, like that of
a son with a loving father. Jehovah communicated
with his earthly son, giving Adam satisfying assignments of work and letting him know what was expected of him.—Genesis 1:28-30; 2:16, 17.
Adam was made “in God’s image.” (Genesis 1:
27) That did not mean that Adam resembled God
in appearance. As we learned in Chapter 1 of this
book, Jehovah is an invisible Spirit. (John 4:24) So
Jehovah does not have a body of ?esh and blood.
Being made in God’s image meant that Adam was
created with qualities like those of God, including
love, wisdom, justice, and power. Adam was like his
Father in another important way in that he possessed free will. Hence, Adam was not like a machine that can perform only what it is designed or
programmed to do. Instead, he could make personal decisions, choosing between right and wrong. If
he had chosen to obey God, he would have lived
forever in Paradise on earth.
5

5. What does the Bible mean when it says that Adam was made “in
God’s image”?
The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

59

Clearly, then, when Adam disobeyed God and
was condemned to death, he paid a very high price.
6

His sin cost him his perfect human life with all its
blessings. (Genesis 3:17-19) Sadly, Adam lost this
precious life not only for himself but also for his
future o?spring. God’s Word says: “Through one
man [Adam] sin entered into the world and death
through sin, and so death spread to all men because
they had all sinned.” (Romans 5:12) Yes, all of us
have inherited sin from Adam. Hence, the Bible
says that he “sold” himself and his o?spring into
slavery to sin and death. (Romans 7:14) There was
no hope for Adam or Eve because they willfully
chose to disobey God. But what about their o?spring, including us?
7

Jehovah came to mankind’s rescue by means of

the ransom. What is a ransom? The idea of a ransom basically involves two things. First, a ransom is
the price paid to bring about a release or to buy
something back. It might be compared to the price
6. When Adam disobeyed God, what did he lose, and how were his o?spring a?ected?
7, 8. A ransom basically involves what two things?
60

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

paid for the release of a prisoner of war. Second, a
ransom is the price that covers, or pays, the cost of
something. It is similar to the price paid to cover
the damages caused by an injury. For example, if a
person causes an accident, he would have to pay an
amount that fully corresponds to, or equals, the value of what was damaged.
How would it be possible to cover the enormous
loss that Adam in?icted on all of us and to release
us from slavery to sin and death? Let us consider
the ransom that Jehovah provided and what this
can mean for you.
8

HOW JEHOVAH PROVIDED
THE RANS OM
9 Since a perfect human life was lost, no imperfect human life could ever buy it back. (Psalm 49:
7, 8) What was needed was a ransom equal in val-

ue to what was lost. This is in harmony with the
principle of perfect justice found in God’s Word,
which says: “Life will be for life.” (Deuteronomy 19:
21) So, what would cover the value of the perfect human soul, or life, that Adam lost? Another
9. What sort of ransom was required?
The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

61

perfect human life was the “corresponding ransom”
that was required.—1 Timothy 2:6.
How did Jehovah provide the ransom? He sent
one of his perfect spirit sons to the earth. But Jehovah did not send just any spirit creature. He sent
the one most precious to him, his only-begotten
Son. (Read 1 John 4:9, 10.) Willingly, this Son left
his heavenly home. (Philippians 2:7) As we learned
in the preceding chapter of this book, Jehovah performed a miracle when he transferred the life of
this Son to the womb of Mary. By means of God’s
holy spirit, Jesus was born as a perfect human and
was not under the penalty of sin.—Luke 1:35.
10

How could one man serve as a ransom for
many, in fact, millions of humans? Well, how did
humans numbering into the millions come to be
sinners in the ?rst place? Recall that by sinning,
Adam lost the precious possession of perfect human life. Hence, he could not pass it on to his o?spring. Instead, he could pass on only sin and death.
Jesus, whom the Bible calls “the last Adam,” had a
11

10. How did Jehovah provide the ransom?
11. How could one man serve as a ransom for millions?
62

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

perfect human life, and he never sinned. (1 Corinthians 15:45) In a sense, Jesus stepped into Adam’s
place in order to save us. By sacri?cing, or giving
up, his perfect life in ?awless obedience to God,
Jesus paid the price for Adam’s sin. Jesus thus
brought hope to Adam’s o?spring.—Romans 5:19;
1 Corinthians 15:21, 22.
12 The Bible describes in detail the su?ering that
Jesus endured before his death. He was whipped
and nailed to the torture stake, su?ering an agonizing death. (John 19:1, 16-18, 30; Appendix, pages 261-263) Why was it necessary for Jesus to suffer so much? In a later chapter of this book, we will
see that Satan has questioned whether Jehovah has
any human servants who would remain faithful under trial. By enduring faithfully in spite of great suffering, Jesus gave the best possible answer to Satan’s challenge. Jesus proved that a perfect man
possessing free will could keep perfect integrity to
God no matter what the Devil did. Jehovah must
have rejoiced greatly over the faithfulness of his
dear Son!—Proverbs 27:11.
12. What was proved by Jesus’ su?ering?
The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

63

13

How was the ransom paid? On the 14th day of

the Jewish month Nisan in 33 C.E., God allowed his
perfect and sinless Son to be executed. Jesus thus
sacri?ced his perfect human life “once for all time.”
(Hebrews 10:10) On the third day after Jesus died,
Jehovah raised him back to spirit life. In heaven, Jesus presented to God the value of his perfect human life sacri?ced as a ransom in exchange for
Adam’s o?spring. (Hebrews 9:24) Jehovah accepted
the value of Jesus’ sacri?ce as the ransom needed
to deliver mankind from slavery to sin and death.
—Read Romans 3:23, 24.
WHAT THE RANS OM CAN MEAN FOR YOU
14 Despite our sinful condition, we can enjoy

priceless blessings because of the ransom. Let us
consider some of the present and future bene?ts of
this greatest gift from God.
15

The forgiveness of sins. Because of inherited im-

perfection, we have a real struggle to do what is
right. All of us sin either in word or in deed. But
13. How was the ransom paid?
14, 15. To receive “the forgiveness of our sins,” what must we do?
64

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

by means of Jesus’ ransom sacri?ce, we can receive
“the forgiveness of our sins.” (Colossians 1:13, 14)
To gain that forgiveness, however, we must be truly repentant. We must also humbly appeal to Jehovah, asking his forgiveness on the basis of our faith
in the ransom sacri?ce of his Son.—Read 1 John 1:
8, 9.
A clean conscience before God. A guilty conscience can easily lead to hopelessness and make us
feel worthless. Through the forgiveness made possible by the ransom, though, Jehovah kindly enables
us to worship him with a clean conscience despite
our imperfection. (Hebrews 9:13, 14) This makes it
16

possible for us to have freeness of speech with Jehovah. Therefore, we can freely approach him in
prayer. (Hebrews 4:14-16) Maintaining a clean conscience gives peace of mind, promotes self-respect,
and contributes to happiness.
The hope of everlasting life on a paradise earth.
“The wages sin pays is death,” says Romans 6:23.
17

16. What enables us to worship God with a clean conscience, and what
is the value of such a conscience?
17. What blessings are made possible because Jesus died for us?
The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

65

The same verse adds: “But the gift God gives is
everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.” In Chapter 3 of this book, we discussed the blessings of the
coming earthly Paradise. (Revelation 21:3, 4) All
those future blessings, including life everlasting in
perfect health, are made possible because Jesus
died for us. To receive those blessings, we need to
show that we appreciate the gift of the ransom.
HOW CAN YOU SHOW YOUR APPRECIATION?
18 Why should we be deeply grateful to Jehovah

for the ransom? Well, a gift is especially precious
when it involves a sacri?ce of time, e?ort, or expense on the part of the giver. Our heart is touched
when we see that a gift is an expression of the giver’s genuine love for us. The ransom is the most
precious of all gifts, for God made the greatest sacri?ce ever in providing it. “God loved the world so
much that he gave his only-begotten Son,” says
John 3:16. The ransom is the most outstanding evidence of Jehovah’s love for us. It is also proof of
18. Why should we be grateful to Jehovah for the provision of the ransom?
66

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jesus’ love, for he willingly gave his life in our behalf. (Read John 15:13.) The gift of the ransom
should therefore convince us that Jehovah and his
Son love us as individuals.—Galatians 2:20.
How, then, can you demonstrate that you appreciate God’s gift of the ransom? To begin with, get
to know the Great Giver, Jehovah. (John 17:3) A study
of the Bible with the aid of this publication will
help you to do that. As you come to know Jehovah,
your love for him will deepen. In turn, that love will
make you want to please him.—1 John 5:3.
19

Exercise faith in Jesus’ ransom sacri?ce. Regarding Jesus, it is said: “The one who exercises faith in
the Son has everlasting life.” (John 3:36) How can
we exercise faith in Jesus? Such faith is not shown
by words alone. “Faith without works is dead,” says
James 2:26. Yes, true faith is proved by “works,”
that is, by our actions. One way to show that we
have faith in Jesus is by doing our best to imitate
him not just in what we say but also in what we do.
—John 13:15.
20

19, 20. In what ways can you show that you appreciate God’s gift of
the ransom?
The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

67

Attend the annual observance of the Lord’s Evening
Meal. On the evening of Nisan 14, 33 C.E., Jesus introduced a special observance that the Bible calls
“the Lord’s Evening Meal.” (1 Corinthians 11:20;
Matthew 26:26-28) This observance is also called
the Memorial of Christ’s death. Jesus instituted it
to help his apostles and all true Christians after
them to bear in mind that by means of his death as
a perfect human, he gave his life, or soul, as a ransom. Regarding this observance, Jesus commanded:
“Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:
19) Observing the Memorial reminds us of the great
love shown by both Jehovah and Jesus in connection with the ransom. We can show our appreciation for the ransom by being present at the yearly
observance of the Memorial of Jesus’ death.1
22 Jehovah’s provision of the ransom is indeed an
invaluable gift. (2 Corinthians 9:14, 15) This priceless gift can bene?t even those who have died.
Chapters 6 and 7 will explain how.
21

1 For more information about the meaning of the Lord’s Evening
Meal, see the Appendix, pages 263-266.

21, 22. (a) Why should we attend the annual observance of the
Lord’s Evening Meal? (b) What will be explained in Chapters 6 and 7?
68

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? The ransom is Jehovah’s means to deliver humankind from sin and death.
—Ephesians 1:7.
? Jehovah provided the ransom by sending his
only-begotten Son to earth to die for us.
—1 John 4:9, 10.
? By means of the ransom, we gain the forgiveness of sins, a clean conscience, and the hope
of everlasting life.—1 John 1:8, 9.
? We show that we appreciate the ransom by
getting to know Jehovah, by exercising faith in
Jesus’ ransom sacri?ce, and by attending the
Lord’s Evening Meal.
—John 3:16.

The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift

69

CHAPTER SIX

Where Are the Dead?
What happens to us when we die?
Why do we die?
Would it be comforting to know
the truth about death?
THESE are questions that people have thought
about for thousands of years. They are important
questions. No matter who we are or where we live,
the answers concern each one of us.
In the preceding chapter, we discussed how the
ransom sacri?ce of Jesus Christ opened the way to
everlasting life. We also learned that the Bible foretells a time when “death will be no more.” (Revelation 21:4) Meanwhile, we all die. “The living know
that they will die,” said wise King Solomon. (Ecclesiastes 9:5) We try to live as long as possible. Still,
we wonder what will happen to us when we die.
2

3

When our loved ones die, we mourn. And we

1-3. What questions do people ask about death, and what answers do
various religions o?er?
70

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

may ask: ‘What has happened to them? Are they
su?ering? Are they watching over us? Can we help
them? Will we ever see them again?’ The world’s religions o?er di?ering answers to these questions.
Some teach that if you live a good life, you will go
to heaven but if you live a bad life, you will burn
in a place of torment. Other religions teach that at
death, people pass on to the spirit realm to be with
their ancestors. Still other religions teach that the
dead go to an underworld to be judged and are then
reincarnated, or reborn in another body.
4 Such religious teachings all share one basic idea
—that some part of us survives the death of the
physical body. According to almost every religion,
past and present, we somehow live on forever with
the ability to see, hear, and think. Yet, how can that
be? Our senses, along with our thoughts, are all
linked to the workings of our brain. At death, the
brain stops working. Our memories, feelings, and
senses do not continue to function independently in
some mysterious way. They do not survive the destruction of our brain.
4. What basic idea do many religions share concerning death?
Where Are the Dead?

71

WHAT REALLY HAPPENS AT DEATH?
5 What happens at death is no mystery to Jehovah, the Creator of the brain. He knows the truth,
and in his Word, the Bible, he explains the condition of the dead. Its clear teaching is this: When a
person dies, he ceases to exist. Death is the opposite
of life. The dead do not see or hear or think. Not
even one part of us survives the death of the body.
We do not possess an immortal soul or spirit.1

After Solomon observed that the living know
that they will die, he wrote: “But the dead know
nothing at all.” He then enlarged on that basic truth
by saying that the dead can neither love nor hate
and that “there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave.” (Read Ecclesiastes 9:
5, 6, 10.) Similarly, Psalm 146:4 says that when a
man dies, “his thoughts perish.” We are mortal and
do not survive the death of our body. The life we
enjoy is like the ?ame of a candle. When the ?ame
is put out, it does not go anywhere. It is simply
gone.
6

1 For a discussion of the words “soul” and “spirit,” please see the
Appendix, pages 266-271.

5, 6. What does the Bible teach about the condition of the dead?
72

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

7

WHAT JESUS SAID AB OUT DEATH
Jesus Christ spoke about the condition of the

dead. He did so with regard to Lazarus, a man
whom he knew well and who had died. Jesus told
his disciples: “Lazarus our friend has fallen asleep.”
The disciples thought that Jesus meant that Lazarus was resting in sleep, recovering from an illness.
They were wrong. Jesus explained: “Lazarus has
died.” (Read John 11:11-14.) Notice that Jesus compared death to sleep. Lazarus was neither in heaven nor in a burning hell. He was not meeting angels
or ancestors. Lazarus was not being reborn as another human. He was at rest in death, as though in
a deep sleep without dreams. Other scriptures also
compare death to sleep. For example, when the disciple Stephen was stoned to death, the Bible says
that he “fell asleep.” (Acts 7:60) Similarly, the apostle Paul wrote about some in his day who had “fallen asleep in death.”—1 Corinthians 15:6.
Was it God’s original purpose for people to die?
Not at all! Jehovah made man to live forever on
8

7. How did Jesus explain what death is like?
8. How do we know that it was not God’s purpose for people to die?
Where Are the Dead?

73

earth. As we learned earlier in this book, God
placed the ?rst human couple in a delightful paradise. He blessed them with perfect health. Jehovah
wanted only good for them. Does any loving parent
want his children to su?er the pain of old age and
death? Of course not! Jehovah loved his children
and wanted them to enjoy endless happiness on
earth. Concerning humans, the Bible says: “[Jehovah] has even put eternity in their heart.” (Ecclesiastes 3:11) God created us with the desire to live
forever. And he has opened the way for that desire
to be ful?lled.
9

WHY HUMANS DIE
Why, then, do humans die? To ?nd the answer,

we must consider what happened when there was
only one man and one woman on earth. The Bible
explains: “Jehovah God made to grow out of the
ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and
good for food.” (Genesis 2:9) However, there was
one restriction. Jehovah told Adam: “From every
tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction. But
9. What restriction did Jehovah place upon Adam, and why was this
command not di?cult to obey?
74

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad,
you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat
from it you will certainly die.” (Genesis 2:16, 17)
This command was not di?cult to obey. There were
many other trees from which Adam and Eve could
eat. But they now received a special opportunity to
show their gratitude to the One who had given them
everything, including perfect life. Their obedience
would also show that they respected the authority
of their heavenly Father and that they wanted his
loving direction.
10

Sadly, the ?rst human couple chose to disobey

Jehovah. Speaking through a serpent, Satan asked
Eve: “Did God really say that you must not eat
from every tree of the garden?” Eve replied: “We
may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden. But
God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in
the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from
it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will
die.’ ”—Genesis 3:1-3.
10, 11. (a) How did the ?rst human couple come to disobey God?
(b) Why was the disobedience of Adam and Eve a serious matter?
Where Are the Dead?

75

“You certainly will not die,” said Satan. “God
knows that in the very day you eat from it, your
eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.” (Genesis 3:4, 5) Satan wanted
Eve to believe that she would bene?t by eating the
forbidden fruit. According to him, she could decide
for herself what was right and what was wrong; she
could do what she wanted. Satan also charged that
Jehovah had lied about the consequences of eating
the fruit. Eve believed Satan. So she picked some of
the fruit and ate it. She then gave some to her husband, and he too ate some of it. They did not act
in ignorance. They knew that they were doing exactly what God had told them not to do. By eating
the fruit, they deliberately disobeyed a simple and
reasonable command. They showed contempt for
their heavenly Father and his authority. Such disrespect for their loving Creator was inexcusable!
11

To illustrate: How would you feel if you raised
and cared for a son or a daughter who then disobeyed you in a way that showed that he or she had
12

12. What may help us to understand how Jehovah felt when Adam and
Eve took a course of opposition to him?
76

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

no respect or love for you? That would cause you
much heartache. Imagine, then, how hurt Jehovah
must have felt when both Adam and Eve took a
course of opposition to him.
Jehovah had no reason to sustain disobedient
Adam and Eve forever. They died, just as he had
said they would. Adam and Eve ceased to exist.
They did not pass on to the spirit realm. We know
this because of what Jehovah said to Adam after
confronting him with his disobedience. God said:
“You [will] return to the ground, for out of it you
were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will
return.” (Genesis 3:19) God had made Adam from
13

the dust of the ground. (Genesis 2:7) Before that,
Adam did not exist. Therefore, when Jehovah said
that Adam would return to the dust, He meant that
Adam would return to a state of nonexistence.
Adam would be as lifeless as the dust from which
he was made.
14

Adam and Eve could have been alive today, but

13. What did Jehovah say would happen to Adam at death, and what
does this mean?
14. Why do we die?
Where Are the Dead?

77

they died because they chose to disobey God and
thus sinned. The reason we die is that Adam’s sinful condition as well as death was passed on to all
of his descendants. (Read Romans 5:12.) That sin is
like a terrible inherited disease from which no
one can escape. Its consequence, death, is a curse.
Death is an enemy, not a friend. (1 Corinthians 15:
26) How grateful we can be that Jehovah provided
the ransom to rescue us from this dreadful enemy!

15

KNOWING THE TRUTH
AB OUT DEATH IS BENEFICIAL
What the Bible teaches about the condition of

the dead is comforting. As we have seen, the dead
do not su?er pain or heartache. There is no reason
to be afraid of them, for they cannot harm us. They
do not need our help, and they cannot help us. We
cannot speak with them, and they cannot speak
with us. Many religious leaders falsely claim that
they can help those who have died, and people who
believe such leaders give them money. But knowing
the truth protects us from being deceived by those
who teach such lies.
15. Why is it comforting to know the truth about death?
78

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Does your religion agree with what the Bible
teaches about the dead? Most do not. Why? Because their teachings have been in?uenced by Satan. He uses false religion to get people to believe
that after their body dies, they will continue to live
in the spirit realm. This is a lie that Satan combines
with other lies to turn people away from Jehovah
God. How so?
17 As noted earlier, some religions teach that if a
person lives a bad life, after death he will go to a
place of ?ery torment to su?er forever. This teaching dishonors God. Jehovah is a God of love and
would never make people su?er in this way. (Read
1 John 4:8.) How would you feel about a man who
punished a disobedient child by holding his hands
in a ?re? Would you respect such a man? In fact,
would you even want to get to know him? De?nitely not! You would likely think that he was very cruel. Yet, Satan wants us to believe that Jehovah tortures people in ?re forever—for countless billions
of years!
16

16. Who has in?uenced the teachings of many religions, and in what
way?
17. Why does the teaching of eternal torment dishonor Jehovah?
Where Are the Dead?

79

18

Satan also uses some religions to teach that af-

ter death people become spirits who must be respected and honored by the living. According to
this teaching, the spirits of the dead can become
powerful friends or terrible enemies. Many people
believe this lie. They fear the dead and give them
honor and worship. In contrast, the Bible teaches
that the dead are sleeping and that we should worship only the true God, Jehovah, our Creator and
Provider.—Revelation 4:11.
19

Knowing the truth about the dead protects you

from being misled by religious lies. It also helps you
to understand other Bible teachings. For example,
when you realize that people do not pass on to the
spirit realm at death, the promise of everlasting life
on a paradise earth takes on real meaning for you.
20

Long ago, the righteous man Job raised this

question: “If a man dies, can he live again?” (Job
14:14) Can a lifeless person who is sleeping in death
18. Worship of the dead is based on what religious lie?
19. Knowing the truth about death helps us to understand what other
Bible teaching?
20. What question will we consider in the next chapter?
80

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

be brought back to life? What the Bible teaches
about this is deeply comforting, as the next chapter
will show.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? The dead do not see or hear or think.
—Ecclesiastes 9:5.
? The dead are asleep; they do not su?er.
—John 11:11.
? We die because we inherited sin from Adam.
—Romans 5:12.

Where Are the Dead?

81

CHAPTER SEVEN

Real Hope for Your Loved Ones
Who Have Died
How do we know that the resurrection
will really happen?
How does Jehovah feel about
resurrecting the dead?
Who will be resurrected?
IMAGINE that you are running away from a vicious enemy. He is much stronger and faster than
you are. You know that he is merciless because you
have seen him kill some of your friends. No matter
how hard you try to outrun him, he keeps getting closer. There seems to be no hope. Suddenly,
though, a rescuer appears at your side. He is far
more powerful than your enemy, and he promises
to help you. How relieved that makes you feel!
In a sense, you are being pursued by such an enemy. All of us are. As we learned in the preceding
2

1-3. What enemy pursues all of us, and why will considering what the
Bible teaches bring us some relief?
82

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

chapter, the Bible calls death an enemy. None of us
can outrun it or ?ght it o?. Most of us have seen
this enemy claim the lives of people dear to us. But
Jehovah is far more powerful than death. He is the
loving Rescuer who has already shown that he can
defeat this enemy. And he promises to destroy this
enemy, death, once and for all. The Bible teaches:
“The last enemy, death, is to be brought to nothing.” (1 Corinthians 15:26) That is good news!
3

Let us take a brief look at how the enemy death

a?ects us when it strikes. Doing this will help us to
appreciate something that will make us happy. You
see, Jehovah promises that the dead will live again.
(Isaiah 26:19) They will be brought back to life.
That is the hope of the resurrection.
4

WHEN A LOVED ONE DIES
Have you lost a loved one in death? The pain,

the grief, and the feelings of helplessness can seem
unbearable. At such times, we need to go to God’s
Word for comfort. (Read 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.) The
4. (a) Why does Jesus’ reaction to the death of a loved one teach us
about Jehovah’s feelings? (b) Jesus developed what special friendship?
Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died

83

Bible helps us to understand how Jehovah and Jesus feel about death. Jesus, who perfectly re?ected
his Father, knew the pain of losing someone in
death. (John 14:9) When he was in Jerusalem, Jesus
used to visit Lazarus and his sisters, Mary and Martha, who lived in the nearby town of Bethany. They
became close friends. The Bible says: “Jesus loved
Martha and her sister and Lazarus.” (John 11:5) As
we learned in the preceding chapter, though, Lazarus died.
5

How did Jesus feel about losing his friend? The

account tells us that Jesus joined Lazarus’ relatives
and friends as they grieved over this loss. Seeing
them, Jesus was deeply moved. He “groaned within
himself and became troubled.” Then, the account
says, “Jesus gave way to tears.” (John 11:33, 35) Did
Jesus’ grief mean that he had no hope? Not at all.
In fact, Jesus knew that something wonderful was
about to happen. (John 11:3, 4) Still, he felt the
pain and sorrow that death brings.
5, 6. (a) How did Jesus respond when he was with Lazarus’ grieving
family and friends? (b) Why is Jesus’ grief encouraging to us?
84

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

In a way, Jesus’ grief is encouraging to us. It
teaches us that Jesus and his Father, Jehovah, hate
death. But Jehovah God is able to ?ght and overcome that enemy! Let us see what God enabled Jesus to do.
6

7

“LAZARUS, COME OUT!”
Lazarus had been buried in a cave, and Jesus

asked that the stone sealing its entrance be taken
away. Martha objected because after four days, Lazarus’ body must have begun to decay. (John 11:39)
From a human standpoint, what hope was there?
The stone was rolled away, and Jesus cried out
with a loud voice: “Lazarus, come out!” What happened? “The man who had been dead came out.”
(John 11:43, 44) Can you imagine the joy of the people there? Whether Lazarus was their brother, relative, friend, or neighbor, they knew that he had
died. Yet, here he was—the same dear man—standing among them again. That must have seemed too
good to be true. Many no doubt embraced Lazarus
joyfully. What a victory over death!
8

7, 8. Why might the case of Lazarus have seemed hopeless to human
onlookers, but what did Jesus do?
Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died

85

9

Jesus did not claim to perform this amazing mir-

acle on his own. In his prayer just before calling out
to Lazarus, he made it clear that Jehovah was the
Source of the resurrection. (Read John 11:41, 42.)
This was not the only time that Jehovah used his
power in this way. The resurrection of Lazarus is
just one of nine miracles of this kind recorded in
God’s Word.1 To read and study these accounts is
a delight. They teach us that God is not partial, for
the resurrected ones include young and old, male
and female, Israelite and non-Israelite. And what
joy is described in these passages! For example,
when Jesus raised a young girl from the dead, her
parents “were beside themselves with great ecstasy.” (Mark 5:42) Yes, Jehovah had given them a
cause for joy that they would never forget.
10

Of course, those resurrected by Jesus eventual-

ly died again. Does this mean that it was pointless
1 The other accounts are found at 1 Kings 17:17-24; 2 Kings 4:3237; 13:20, 21; Matthew 28:5-7; Luke 7:11-17; 8:40-56; Acts 9:36-42;
and 20:7-12.

9, 10. (a) How did Jesus reveal the Source of his power to resurrect
Lazarus? (b) What are some of the bene?ts of reading the Bible’s resurrection accounts?
86

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

to resurrect them? Not at all. These Bible accounts
con?rm important truths and give us hope.
LEARNING FROM
THE RESURRECTION ACCOUNTS
11 The Bible teaches that “the dead know nothing
at all.” (Ecclesiastes 9:5) They are not alive and

have no conscious existence anywhere. The account
of Lazarus con?rms this. Upon returning to life,
did Lazarus thrill people with descriptions of heaven? Or did he terrify them with horrible tales about
a burning hell? No. The Bible contains no such
words from Lazarus. During the four days that he
was dead, he knew “nothing at all.” Lazarus had
simply been sleeping in death.—John 11:11.
The account of Lazarus also teaches us that the
resurrection is a reality, not a mere myth. Jesus
raised Lazarus in front of a crowd of eyewitnesses.
Even the religious leaders, who hated Jesus, did not
deny this miracle. Rather, they said: “What are
we to do, for this man [Jesus] performs many
12

11. How does the account of Lazarus’ resurrection help to con?rm the
truth recorded at Ecclesiastes 9:5?
12. Why can we be sure that the resurrection of Lazarus really happened?
Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died

87

signs?” (John 11:47) Many people went to see the
resurrected man. As a result, even more of them
put faith in Jesus. They saw in Lazarus living proof
that Jesus was sent by God. This evidence was so
powerful that some of the hardhearted Jewish religious leaders planned to kill both Jesus and Lazarus.—John 11:53; 12:9-11.
13

Is it unrealistic to accept the resurrection as a

fact? No, for Jesus taught that someday “all those
in the memorial tombs” will be resurrected. (John
5:28) Jehovah is the Creator of all life. Should it be
hard to believe that he can re-create life? Of course,
much would depend on Jehovah’s memory. Can he
remember our dead loved ones? Countless trillions
of stars ?ll the universe, yet God knows the name
of each one! (Isaiah 40:26) So Jehovah God can remember our dead loved ones in every detail, and he
is ready to restore them to life.
14

How, though, does Jehovah feel about resur-

13. What basis do we have for believing that Jehovah really can resurrect the dead?
14, 15. As illustrated by what Job said, how does Jehovah feel about
bringing the dead back to life?
88

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

recting the dead? The Bible teaches that he is eager
to raise the dead. The faithful man Job asked: “If a
man dies, can he live again?” Job was speaking
about waiting in the grave until the time came for
God to remember him. He said to Jehovah: “You
will call, and I will answer you. You will long for
the work of your hands.”—Job 14:13-15.
15

Just think! Jehovah longs for the time when he

will bring the dead back to life. Is it not heartwarming to learn that Jehovah feels that way? But what
about this future resurrection? Who will be resurrected, and where?
“ALL THO SE IN THE MEMORIAL TOMBS”
16 The Bible’s resurrection accounts teach us

much about the resurrection to come. People who
were restored to life right here on earth were reunited with their loved ones. The future resurrection
will be similar—but much better. As we learned in
Chapter 3, God’s purpose is that the whole earth be
made into a paradise. So the dead will not be
raised to life in a world ?lled with war, crime, and
16. The dead will be resurrected to live in what kind of conditions?
Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died

89

sickness. They will have an opportunity to live forever on this earth in peaceful and happy conditions.
Who will be resurrected? Jesus said that “all
those in the memorial tombs will hear his [Jesus’]
17

voice and come out.” (John 5:28, 29) Similarly, Revelation 20:13 says: “The sea gave up the dead in it,
and death and the Grave gave up the dead in them.”
(See the Appendix, pages 271-273.) This collective
grave will be emptied. All those billions who rest
there will live again. The apostle Paul said: “There
is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous
and the unrighteous.” (Acts 24:15) What does that
mean?
“The righteous” include many of the people we
read about in the Bible who lived before Jesus came
to the earth. You might think of Noah, Abraham,
Sarah, Moses, Ruth, Esther, and many others. Some
of these men and women of faith are discussed in
the 11th chapter of Hebrews. But “the righteous”
also include Jehovah’s servants who die in our time.
18

17. How extensive will the resurrection be?
18. Who are included among “the righteous” who are to be resurrected, and how may this hope a?ect you personally?
90

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Thanks to the resurrection hope, we do not have to
be afraid of dying.—Hebrews 2:15.
What about all the people who did not serve or
obey Jehovah because they never knew about him?
These billions of “unrighteous” ones will not be forgotten. They too will be resurrected and given time
to learn about the true God and to serve him. During a period of a thousand years, the dead will be
resurrected and given an opportunity to join faithful humans on earth in serving Jehovah. It will be
a wonderful time. This period is what the Bible refers to as Judgment Day.1
19

Does this mean that every human who ever
lived will be resurrected? No. The Bible says that
some of the dead are in “Gehenna.” (Luke 12:5) Gehenna got its name from a garbage dump located
outside of ancient Jerusalem. Dead bodies and garbage were burned there. The dead whose bodies
were thrown there were considered by the Jews to
20

1 For more information on Judgment Day and the basis for judgment, please see the Appendix, pages 273-276.

19. Who are “the unrighteous,” and what opportunity does Jehovah
kindly give them?
20. What is Gehenna, and who go there?
Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died

91

be unworthy of a burial and a resurrection. So Gehenna is a ?tting symbol of everlasting destruction.
Although Jesus will have a role in judging the living
and the dead, Jehovah is the ?nal Judge. (Acts 10:
42) He will never resurrect those whom he judges
to be wicked and unwilling to change.
21

THE HEAVENLY RESURRECTION
The Bible also refers to another kind of resur-

rection, one to life as a spirit creature in heaven.
Only one example of this type of resurrection is recorded in the Bible, that of Jesus Christ.
22

After Jesus was put to death as a human, Jeho-

vah did not allow His faithful Son to remain in the
Grave. (Psalm 16:10; Acts 13:34, 35) God resurrected Jesus, but not as a human. The apostle Peter explains that Christ was “put to death in the ?esh but
made alive in the spirit.” (1 Peter 3:18) This truly
was a great miracle. Jesus was alive again as a
mighty spirit person! (Read 1 Corinthians 15:3-6.) Jesus was the ?rst ever to receive this glorious type
21, 22. (a) What other kind of resurrection is there? (b) Who was
the ?rst ever to receive a resurrection to spirit life?
92

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

of resurrection, but he would not be the last.—John
3:13.
Knowing that he would soon return to heaven,
Jesus told his faithful followers that he would “prepare a place” for them there. (John 14:2) Jesus referred to those going to heaven as his “little ?ock.”
(Luke 12:32) How many are to be in this relatively small group of faithful Christians? According
to Revelation 14:1, the apostle John says: “I saw,
and look! the Lamb [Jesus Christ] standing on
Mount Zion, and with him 144,000 who have his
name and the name of his Father written on their
foreheads.”
23

These 144,000 Christians, including Jesus’ faithful apostles, are raised to life in heaven. When
does their resurrection take place? The apostle
Paul wrote that it would occur during the time of
Christ’s presence. (1 Corinthians 15:23) As you will
learn in Chapter 9, we are now living in that time.
So those few remaining ones of the 144,000 who
die in our day are instantly resurrected to life in
24

23, 24. Who make up Jesus’ “little ?ock,” and how many will they
number?
Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died

93

heaven. (1 Corinthians 15:51-55) The vast majority
of mankind, however, have the prospect of being
resurrected in the future to life in Paradise on
earth.
Yes, Jehovah really will defeat our enemy death,
and it will be gone forever! (Read Isaiah 25:8.) Yet,
you may wonder, ‘What will those resurrected to
heaven do there?’ They will form part of a marvelous Kingdom government in heaven. We will learn
more about that government in the next chapter.
25

25. What will be considered in the next chapter?

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? The Bible’s resurrection accounts give us a
sure hope.—John 11:39-44.
? Jehovah is eager to bring the dead back to life.
—Job 14:13-15.
? All of those in the common grave of mankind
will be resurrected.—John 5:28, 29.

94

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER EIGHT

What Is God’s Kingdom?
What does the Bible tell us about
the Kingdom of God?
What will God’s Kingdom do?
When will the Kingdom cause God’s will
to be done on earth?
MILLIONS of people worldwide are familiar with
the prayer that many call the Our Father, or the
Lord’s Prayer. Both expressions refer to a famous
prayer given as a model by Jesus Christ himself.
It is a very meaningful prayer, and a consideration
of its ?rst three petitions will help you to learn
more about what the Bible really teaches.
2

At the beginning of this model prayer, Jesus in-

structed his hearers: “You must pray, then, this
way: ‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be
sancti?ed. Let your Kingdom come. Let your will
1. What famous prayer will now be examined?
2. What were three of the things that Jesus taught his disciples to pray
for?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

95

take place, as in heaven, also on earth.’ ” (Matthew
6:9-13) What is the signi?cance of these three petitions?
We have already learned a lot about God’s
name, Jehovah. And to some extent we have discussed God’s will—what he has done and will yet
do for mankind. To what, though, was Jesus referring when he told us to pray: “Let your Kingdom
come”? What is God’s Kingdom? How will its coming sanctify God’s name, or make it holy? And
how is the coming of the Kingdom related to the
doing of God’s will?
3

4

WHAT G OD’S KINGD OM IS
God’s Kingdom is a government established by

Jehovah God with a King chosen by God. Who is
the King of God’s Kingdom? Jesus Christ. Jesus as
King is greater than all human rulers and is called
“the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of
those who rule as lords.” (1 Timothy 6:15) He has
the power to do far more good than any human
ruler, even the best among them.
3. What do we need to know about God’s Kingdom?
4. What is God’s Kingdom, and who is its King?
96

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

5

From where will God’s Kingdom rule? Well,

where is Jesus? You will remember learning that
he was put to death on a torture stake, and then
he was resurrected. Shortly thereafter, he ascended to heaven. (Acts 2:33) Hence, that is where
God’s Kingdom is—in heaven. That is why the Bible calls it a “heavenly Kingdom.” (2 Timothy 4:
18) Although God’s Kingdom is in heaven, it will
rule over the earth.—Read Revelation 11:15.
6

What makes Jesus an outstanding King? For

one thing, he will never die. Comparing Jesus with
human kings, the Bible calls him “the one alone
having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable
light.” (1 Timothy 6:16) This means that all the
good that Jesus does will last. And he will do great
and good things.
7

Consider this Bible prophecy about Jesus: “The

spirit of Jehovah will settle upon him, the spirit of
wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of mightiness, the spirit of knowledge and
5. From where does God’s Kingdom rule, and over what?
6, 7. What makes Jesus an outstanding King?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

97

of the fear of Jehovah. And he will ?nd delight in
the fear of Jehovah. He will not judge by what appears to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to
what his ears hear. He will judge the lowly with
fairness, and with uprightness he will give reproof
in behalf of the meek ones of the earth.” (Isaiah
11:2-4) Those words show that Jesus was to be a
righteous and compassionate King over people on
earth. Would you not want to have a ruler like
that?
8

Here is another truth about God’s Kingdom:

Jesus will not rule alone. He will have corulers.
For example, the apostle Paul told Timothy: “If
we go on enduring, we will also rule together as
kings.” (2 Timothy 2:12) Yes, Paul, Timothy, and
other faithful ones who have been selected by God
will rule together with Jesus in the heavenly Kingdom. How many will have that privilege?
9

As pointed out in Chapter 7 of this book, the

apostle John was given a vision in which he saw
8. Who will rule with Jesus?
9. How many will rule with Jesus, and when did God start to choose
them?
98

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

“the Lamb [Jesus Christ] standing on Mount Zion
[his royal position in heaven], and with him 144,000 who have his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.” Who are those
144,000? John himself tells us: “These are the ones
who keep following the Lamb no matter where he
goes. These were bought from among mankind as
?rstfruits to God and to the Lamb.” (Revelation
14:1, 4) Yes, they are faithful followers of Jesus
Christ specially chosen to rule in heaven with him.
After being raised out of death to heavenly life,
“they are to rule as kings over the earth” along
with Jesus. (Revelation 5:10) Since the days of the
apostles, God has been selecting faithful Christians in order to complete the number 144,000.
To arrange for Jesus and the 144,000 to rule
mankind is very loving. For one thing, Jesus knows
what it is like to be a human and to su?er. Regarding Jesus, Paul said: “We do not have a high
priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tested in all
10

10. Why is it a loving arrangement for Jesus and the 144,000 to rule
over mankind?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

99

respects as we have, but without sin.” (Hebrews 4:
15; 5:8) His corulers too have su?ered and endured
as humans. In addition, they have struggled with
imperfection and coped with all kinds of sickness.
Surely, they will understand the problems that humans face!
11

WHAT WILL G OD’S KINGD OM D O?
When Jesus said that his disciples should pray

for God’s Kingdom to come, he also said that they
should pray for God’s will to be done, “as in heaven, also on earth.” God is in heaven, and his
will has always been done there by the faithful
angels. In Chapter 3 of this book, however, we
learned that a wicked angel stopped doing God’s
will and caused Adam and Eve to sin. In Chapter 10, we will learn more about what the Bible teaches regarding that wicked angel, whom we
know as Satan the Devil. Satan and the angelic
spirit creatures who chose to follow him—called
demons—were allowed to stay in heaven for a
11. Why did Jesus say that his disciples should pray for God’s will to
be done in heaven?
100

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

while. Hence, not all in heaven were then doing
God’s will. That was to change when God’s Kingdom would begin to rule. The newly enthroned
King, Jesus Christ, was to wage war on Satan.
—Read Revelation 12:7-9.
The following prophetic words describe what
would happen: “I heard a loud voice in heaven say:
‘Now have come to pass the salvation and the
power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our
brothers [Satan] has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God!’ ” (Revelation 12:10) Did you notice two very important
events described in that Bible verse? First, God’s
Kingdom under Jesus Christ begins to rule. Second, Satan is cast out of heaven down to the earth.
12

What have been the results of those two
events? Regarding what happened in heaven, we
read: “On this account be glad, you heavens and
you who reside in them!” (Revelation 12:12) Yes,
the faithful angels in heaven rejoice because, with
13

12. What two important events are described at Revelation 12:10?
13. What has been the result of Satan’s being cast out of heaven?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

101

Satan and his demons gone, everyone in heaven is
faithful to Jehovah God. There is complete, unbroken peace and harmony there. God’s will is being
done in heaven.
14

What, though, about the earth? The Bible says:

“Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the
Devil has come down to you, having great anger,
knowing that he has a short period of time.” (Revelation 12:12) Satan is angry about being cast out
of heaven and having just a short time left. In his
anger he causes distress, or “woe,” on earth. We
will learn more about that “woe” in the next chapter. But with that in mind, we could ask, How
can the Kingdom cause God’s will to be done on
earth?
Well, remember what God’s will is for the
earth. You learned about it in Chapter 3. In Eden,
15

God showed that his will is for this earth to be a
paradise ?lled with an undying, righteous human
race. Satan caused Adam and Eve to sin, and that
14. What has happened because Satan has been cast down to the
earth?
15. What is God’s will for the earth?
102

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

a?ected the ful?llment of God’s will for the earth
but did not change it. Jehovah still purposes that
“the righteous will possess the earth, and they will
live forever on it.” (Psalm 37:29) And God’s Kingdom will accomplish that. In what way?
16

Consider the prophecy found at Daniel 2:44.

There we read: “In the days of those kings the God
of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be
destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on
to any other people. It will crush and put an end
to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever.” What does this tell us about God’s Kingdom?
17

First, it tells us that God’s Kingdom was to be

established “in the days of those kings,” or while
other kingdoms still existed. Second, it tells us
that the Kingdom will last forever. It will not be
conquered and be replaced by some other government. Third, we see that there will be war between
God’s Kingdom and the kingdoms of this world.
God’s Kingdom will be victorious. In the end, it
16, 17. What does Daniel 2:44 tell us about God’s Kingdom?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

103

will be the only government over mankind. Then
humans will enjoy the best rulership they have
ever known.
18

The Bible has much to say about that ?nal war

between God’s Kingdom and the governments of
this world. For example, it teaches that as the end
approaches, wicked spirits will spread lies to deceive “the kings of the entire inhabited earth.” For
what purpose? “To gather them [the kings] together to the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” The kings of the earth will be gathered
together “to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.” (Revelation 16:14, 16) Because of what
is said in those two verses, the ?nal con?ict between human governments and God’s Kingdom is
called the war of Armageddon.
19

What will God’s Kingdom achieve by means of

the war of Armageddon? Think again about what
God’s will is for the earth. Jehovah God purposed
that the earth be ?lled with a righteous, perfect
18. What is the name of the ?nal war between God’s Kingdom and the
governments of this world?
19, 20. What prevents God’s will from being done on earth right now?
104

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

human race serving him in Paradise. What prevents that from happening right now? First, we are
sinful, and we get sick and die. We learned in
Chapter 5, however, that Jesus died for us so
that we can live forever. Likely you remember the
words recorded in the Gospel of John: “God loved
the world so much that he gave his only-begotten
Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might
not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”—John
3:16.
20

Another problem is that many people do wick-

ed things. They lie, cheat, and commit immorality.
They do not want to do God’s will. People who do
wicked things will be destroyed during God’s war
of Armageddon. (Read Psalm 37:10.) Yet another
reason why God’s will is not being done on earth
is that governments do not encourage people to do
it. Many governments have been weak, cruel, or
corrupt. The Bible frankly says: “Man has dominated man to his harm.”—Ecclesiastes 8:9.
21

After Armageddon, mankind will be under just

21. How will the Kingdom cause God’s will to be done on earth?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

105

one government, God’s Kingdom. That Kingdom
will do God’s will and bring wonderful blessings.
For example, it will remove Satan and his demons.
(Revelation 20:1-3) The power of Jesus’ sacri?ce
will be applied so that faithful humans will no longer get sick and die. Instead, under Kingdom rule
they will be able to live forever. (Read Revelation
22:1-3.) The earth will be made into a paradise.
Thus the Kingdom will cause God’s will to be
done on earth and will sanctify God’s name. What
does this mean? It means that eventually under
God’s Kingdom everyone alive will honor Jehovah’s name.
22

WHEN D OES G OD’S KINGD OM ACT?
When Jesus told his followers to pray, “Let

your Kingdom come,” it was clear that the Kingdom had not come at that time. Did it come when
Jesus ascended to heaven? No, because both Peter
and Paul said that after Jesus was resurrected, the
prophecy at Psalm 110:1 was ful?lled in him: “Je22. Why do we know that God’s Kingdom did not come when Jesus
was on earth or immediately after he was resurrected?
106

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

hovah declared to my Lord: ‘Sit at my right hand
until I place your enemies as a stool for your
feet.’ ” (Acts 2:32-35; Hebrews 10:12, 13) There was
a waiting period.
23

For how long? During the 19th and 20th centu-

ries, sincere Bible students progressively discerned
that the waiting period would end in 1914. (Regarding this date, see the Appendix, pages 276279.) World events that began in 1914 con?rm
that the understanding of these sincere Bible students was correct. The ful?llment of Bible prophecy shows that in 1914, Christ became King and
God’s heavenly Kingdom began to rule. Hence, we
are living in the “short period of time” that Satan
has left. (Revelation 12:12; Psalm 110:2) We can
also say with certainty that soon God’s Kingdom
will act to cause God’s will to be done on earth.
Do you ?nd this to be wonderful news? Do you believe that it is true? The next chapter will help you
to see that the Bible really does teach these things.
23. (a) When did God’s Kingdom begin to rule? (b) What will be discussed in the next chapter?
What Is God’s Kingdom?

107

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? God’s Kingdom is a heavenly government with
Jesus Christ as King, and from among mankind, 144,000 are taken to rule with him.
—Revelation 14:1, 4.
? The Kingdom started to rule in 1914, and since
then Satan has been cast out of heaven down
to earth.—Revelation 12:9.
? God’s Kingdom will soon destroy human governments, and the earth will become a paradise.—Revelation 16:14, 16.

108

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER NINE

Are We Living in “the Last Days”?
What events in our time were foretold
in the Bible?
What does God’s Word say people would be like
in “the last days”?
Regarding “the last days,” what good
things does the Bible foretell?
HAVE you watched the news on television and
wondered, ‘What is this world coming to?’ Tragic
things happen so suddenly and unexpectedly that
no human can predict what tomorrow will bring.
(James 4:14) However, Jehovah knows what the future holds. (Isaiah 46:10) Long ago his Word, the
Bible, foretold not only the bad things happening
in our day but also the wonderful things that will
occur in the near future.
Jesus Christ spoke about the Kingdom of God,
which will bring an end to wickedness and make
2

1. Where can we learn about the future?
2, 3. What question did the disciples ask Jesus, and how did he reply?
Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

109

the earth a paradise. (Luke 4:43) People wanted to
know when the Kingdom would come. In fact, Jesus’ disciples asked him: “What will be the sign of
your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” (Matthew 24:3) In reply Jesus
told them that only Jehovah God knew exactly
when the end of this system of things would come.
(Matthew 24:36) But Jesus did foretell things that
would take place on earth just before the Kingdom
would bring true peace and security to mankind.
What he foretold is now taking place!
3

Before we examine the evidence that we are liv-

ing in “the conclusion of the system of things,” let
us brie?y consider a war that no human could possibly have observed. It took place in the invisible
spirit realm, and its outcome a?ects us.
4

A WAR IN HEAVEN
The preceding chapter in this book explained

that Jesus Christ became King in heaven in the
year 1914. (Read Daniel 7:13, 14.) Soon after he re4, 5. (a) What took place in heaven soon after Jesus was enthroned
as King? (b) According to Revelation 12:12, what was to be the result
of the war in heaven?
110

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

ceived Kingdom power, Jesus took action. “War
broke out in heaven,” says the Bible. “Michael [another name for Jesus] and his angels battled with
the dragon [Satan the Devil], and the dragon and
its angels battled.”1 Satan and his wicked angels,
the demons, lost that war and were cast out of
heaven to the earth. God’s faithful spirit sons rejoiced that Satan and his demons were gone. Humans, however, would experience no such joy. Instead, the Bible foretold: “Woe for the earth . . .
because the Devil has come down to you, having
great anger, knowing that he has a short period of
time.”—Revelation 12:7, 9, 12.
5

Please notice what would result from the war

in heaven. In his fury, Satan would bring woe, or
trouble, upon those on earth. As you will see, we
are now living in that time of woe. But it will be
relatively brief—only “a short period of time.”
Even Satan realizes that. The Bible refers to this
period as “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1) How
1 For information showing that Michael is another name for Jesus Christ, see the Appendix, pages 280-281.
Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

111

glad we can be that God will soon do away with
the Devil’s in?uence over the earth! Let us consider some of the things foretold in the Bible that are
happening right now. These prove that we are living in the last days and that God’s Kingdom will
soon bring everlasting blessings to those who love
Jehovah. First, let us examine four features of the
sign that Jesus said would mark the time in which
we live.

6

MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS
OF THE LAST DAYS
“Nation will rise against nation and kingdom

against kingdom.” (Matthew 24:7) Millions of people have been killed in wars during the past century. One British historian wrote: “The 20th century was the most murderous in recorded history.
. . . It was a century of almost unbroken war, with
few and brief periods without organised armed
con?ict somewhere.” A report from the Worldwatch Institute states: “Three times as many people fell victim to war in [the 20th] century as in
6, 7. How are Jesus’ words about wars and food shortages being ful?lled today?
112

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

all the wars from the ?rst century AD to 1899.”
More than 100 million people have died as a result of wars since 1914. Even if we know the sorrow of losing one loved one in warfare, we can
only imagine such misery and pain multiplied millions of times over.
“There will be food shortages.” (Matthew 24:7)
Researchers say that food production has increased greatly during the past 30 years. Nevertheless, food shortages continue because many people
do not have enough money to buy food or land on
which to raise crops. In developing countries, well
over a billion people have to live on an income of
a dollar or less a day. The majority of these su?er
from chronic hunger. The World Health Organization estimates that malnutrition plays a major role
in the deaths of more than ?ve million children
each year.
7

“There will be great earthquakes.” (Luke 21:11)
According to the U.S. Geological Survey, an average of 19 major earthquakes are expected per
8

8, 9. What shows that Jesus’ prophecies about earthquakes and pestilences have come true?
Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

113

year. These are powerful enough to damage buildings and crack the ground. And on an average,
earthquakes strong enough to cause total destruction of buildings have occurred yearly. Available
records show that earthquakes have claimed over
two million lives since 1900. One source states:
“Improvements in technology have only slightly reduced the death toll.”
“There will be . . . pestilences.” (Luke 21:11)
Despite medical advances, old and new diseases
plague mankind. One report says that 20 wellknown diseases—including tuberculosis, malaria,
and cholera—have become more common in recent decades, and some types of disease are increasingly di?cult to cure by means of drugs. In
fact, at least 30 new diseases have appeared. Some
of them have no known cure and are fatal.
9

10

PEOPLE OF THE LAST DAYS
Aside from identifying certain world develop-

ments, the Bible foretold that the last days would
be marked by a change in human society. The
10. What traits foretold at 2 Timothy 3:1-5 do you see in people today?
114

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

apostle Paul described what people in general
would be like. We are told: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.” (Read
2 Timothy 3:1-5.) Paul said that people would be
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?

lovers ofthemselves
lovers ofmoney
disobedient to parents
disloyal
having no natural a?ection
without self-control
?erce
lovers ofpleasures rather than lovers of God
having an appearance ofgodliness but proving false
to its power

11

Have people become like that in your commu-

nity? No doubt they have. There are people everywhere who have bad traits. This shows that God
will soon act, for the Bible says: “When the wicked sprout like weeds and all the wrongdoers ?ourish, it is that they may be annihilated forever.”
—Psalm 92:7.
11. How does Psalm 92:7 describe what will happen to the wicked
ones?
Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

115

P O SITIVE DEVELOPMENTS!
12 The last days are indeed ?lled with woe, just
as the Bible foretold. In this troubled world, however, there are positive developments among the
worshippers of Jehovah.
13 “The true knowledge will become abundant,” the
Bible book of Daniel foretold. When would that
happen? During “the time of the end.” (Daniel
12:4) Especially since 1914, Jehovah has helped
those who truly desire to serve him to grow in understanding of the Bible. They have grown in appreciation of precious truths about God’s name
and purpose, the ransom sacri?ce of Jesus Christ,
the condition of the dead, and the resurrection.
Moreover, worshippers of Jehovah have learned
how to live their lives in a way that bene?ts them
and brings praise to God. They have also gained a
clearer understanding of the role of God’s Kingdom and how it will set matters straight on the
earth. What do they do with this knowledge? That
question brings us to yet another prophecy that is
being ful?lled in these last days.
12, 13. How has “true knowledge” become abundant in this “time of
the end”?
116

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached
in all the inhabited earth,” said Jesus Christ in his
prophecy about “the conclusion of the system of
things.” (Read Matthew 24:3, 14.) Throughout the
earth, the good news of the Kingdom—what the
Kingdom is, what it will do, and how we can receive its blessings—is being preached in over 230
lands and in hundreds of languages. Millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses zealously preach the Kingdom
good news. They come from “all nations and tribes
and peoples and tongues.” (Revelation 7:9) The
Witnesses conduct free home Bible studies with
millions of people who want to know what the Bible really teaches. What an impressive ful?llment
of prophecy, especially since Jesus foretold that
true Christians would be “hated by all people”!
—Luke 21:17.
14

15

WHAT WILL YOU D O?
Since so many Bible prophecies are being

14. How widespread is the preaching of the Kingdom good news today,
and who are preaching it?
15. (a) Do you believe that we are living in the last days, and why?
(b) What will “the end” mean for those who oppose Jehovah and for
those who submit to the rulership of God’s Kingdom?
Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

117

ful?lled today, do you not agree that we are living
in the last days? After the good news is preached
to Jehovah’s satisfaction, “the end” is certain to
come. (Matthew 24:14) “The end” means the time
when God will get rid of wickedness on earth. To
destroy all who willfully oppose Him, Jehovah will
use Jesus and powerful angels. (2 Thessalonians 1:
6-9) Satan and his demons will no longer mislead
the nations. After that, God’s Kingdom will shower blessings on all who submit to its righteous rulership.—Revelation 20:1-3; 21:3-5.
16

Since the end of Satan’s system is near, we

need to ask ourselves, ‘What should I be doing?’ It
is wise to continue to learn more about Jehovah
and his requirements for us. (John 17:3) Be a serious student of the Bible. Make it your habit to associate regularly with others who seek to do Jehovah’s will. (Read Hebrews 10:24, 25.) Come to know
Jehovah God through a study of his Word, and
make necessary changes in your life so that you
may enjoy God’s favor.—James 4:8.
16. What would it be wise for you to do?
118

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jesus foretold that most people would ignore
the evidence that we are living in the last days.
17

The destruction of the wicked will come suddenly
and unexpectedly. Like a thief in the night, it will
catch most people by surprise. (Read 1 Thessalonians 5:2.) Jesus warned: “As the days of Noah
were, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
For as they were in those days before the Flood,
eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and they took no note until
the Flood came and swept them all away, so the
presence of the Son of man will be.”—Matthew
24:37-39.
Hence, Jesus told his listeners: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become
18

weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking
and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you as a snare. For it will come
upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole
17. Why will the destruction of the wicked catch most people by surprise?
18. What warning by Jesus should we take to heart?
Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

119

earth. Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all
these things that must occur and in standing [with
approval] before the Son of man.” (Luke 21:34-36)
It is wise to take Jesus’ words to heart. Why? Because those having the approval of Jehovah God
and “the Son of man,” Jesus Christ, have the prospect of surviving the end of Satan’s system of
things and of living forever in the marvelous new
world that is so close at hand!—John 3:16; 2 Peter
3:13.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? The last days are marked by wars, food shortages, earthquakes, and pestilences.—Matthew
24:7; Luke 21:11.
? In the last days, many love themselves, money,
and pleasures but do not love God.
—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
? During these last days, the good news of the
Kingdom is being preached worldwide.
—Matthew 24:14.

120

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER TEN

Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us
Do angels help people?
How have wicked spirits in?uenced humans?
Do we need to fear wicked spirits?
GETTING to know a person usually involves learning something about his family. Similarly, getting
to know Jehovah God includes becoming better acquainted with his angelic family. The Bible calls the
angels “sons of God.” (Job 38:7) So, what is their
place in God’s purpose? Have they played a role in
human history? Do angels a?ect your life? If so, how?
2 The Bible refers to angels hundreds of times. Let
us consider a few of these references to learn more
about angels. Where did angels come from? Colossians 1:16 says: “By means of him [Jesus Christ] all
other things were created in the heavens and on the
earth.” Hence, all the spirit creatures called angels
were individually created by Jehovah God through
1. Why should we want to learn about angels?
2. Where did angels come from, and how many are there?
Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us

121

his ?rstborn Son. How many angels are there? The Bible indicates that hundreds of millions of angels were
created, and all of them are powerful.—Psalm 103:
20.1
3 God’s Word, the Bible, tells us that when the earth
was founded, “all the sons of God began shouting in
applause.” (Job 38:4-7) Angels thus existed long before humans were created, even before the creation
of the earth. This Bible passage also shows that angels have feelings, for it says that they “joyfully cried
out together.” Note that “all the sons of God” rejoiced together. At that time, all the angels were part
of a united family serving Jehovah God.
ANGELIC SUPP ORT AND PROTECTION
4 Ever since they witnessed the creation of the ?rst
humans, faithful spirit creatures have shown keen interest in the growing human family and in the outworking of God’s purpose. (Proverbs 8:30, 31; 1 Peter
1 Regarding righteous angels, Revelation 5:11 says: “The number
of them was myriads of myriads,” or “tens of thousands times tens
of thousands.” (Footnote) So the Bible does indicate that hundreds
of millions of angels were created.

3. What does Job 38:4-7 tell us about angels?
4. How does the Bible show that faithful angels are interested in human activities?
122

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

1:11, 12) With the passing of time, however, the angels observed that most of the human family turned
away from serving their loving Creator. No doubt
this saddened the faithful angels. On the other hand,
whenever even one human returns to Jehovah, “joy
arises among the angels.” (Luke 15:10) Since angels
have such deep concern for the welfare of those who
serve God, it is no wonder that Jehovah has repeatedly used angels to strengthen and protect his faithful servants on earth. (Read Hebrews 1:7, 14.) Consider some examples.
5

Two angels helped the righteous man Lot and his

daughters to survive the destruction of the wicked cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by leading them out of
that area. (Genesis 19:15, 16) Centuries later, the
prophet Daniel was thrown into a lions’ pit, but he
escaped harm and said: “My God sent his angel and
shut the mouth of the lions.” (Daniel 6:22) In the ?rst
century C.E., an angel freed the apostle Peter from
prison. (Acts 12:6-11) Moreover, angels supported Jesus at the start of his earthly ministry. (Mark 1:13)
5. What examples of angelic support do we ?nd in the Bible?
Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us

123

And shortly before Jesus’ death, an angel appeared to
Jesus and “strengthened him.” (Luke 22:43) What a
comfort that must have been for Jesus at those very
important times in his life!
Today, angels no longer appear visibly to God’s
people on earth. Although invisible to human eyes,
God’s powerful angels still protect his people, especially from anything spiritually harmful. The Bible
says: “The angel of Jehovah camps all around those
fearing Him, and he rescues them.” (Psalm 34:7) Why
should those words be of great comfort to us? Because there are dangerous wicked spirit creatures
who want to destroy us! Who are they? Where do they
come from? How are they trying to harm us? To ?nd
out, let us brie?y consider something that happened
at the start of human history.
6

SPIRIT CREATURES WHO ARE OUR ENEMIES
7 As we learned in Chapter 3 of this book, one of

the angels developed a desire to rule over others and
thus turned against God. Later this angel became
6. (a) How do angels protect God’s people today? (b) What questions
will we now consider?
7. To what extent did Satan succeed in turning people away from God?
124

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

known as Satan the Devil. (Revelation 12:9) During
the 16 centuries after he deceived Eve, Satan succeeded in turning away from God nearly all humans except a few faithful ones, such as Abel, Enoch, and
Noah.—Hebrews 11:4, 5, 7.
In Noah’s day, other angels rebelled against Jehovah. They left their place in God’s heavenly family,
came down to the earth, and took on ?eshly bodies.
Why? We read at Genesis 6:2: “The sons of the true
God began to notice that the daughters of men were
beautiful. So they began taking as wives all whom
they chose.” But Jehovah God did not allow the actions of these angels and the resulting corruption of
mankind to go on. He brought upon the earth a global ?ood that swept away all wicked humans and preserved only his faithful servants. (Genesis 7:17, 23)
Thus, the rebellious angels, or demons, were forced
to abandon their ?eshly bodies and return to heaven
as spirit creatures. They had put themselves on the
side of the Devil, who thus became “the ruler of the
demons.”—Matthew 9:34.
8

8. (a) How did some angels become demons? (b) To survive the Flood
of Noah’s day, what did the demons have to do?
Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us

125

When the disobedient angels returned to heaven,
they were treated as outcasts, like their ruler, Satan.
(2 Peter 2:4) Although they are now unable to take
on human bodies, they still exercise a very bad in?uence over humans. In fact, with the help of these
demons, Satan “is misleading the entire inhabited
earth.” (Revelation 12:9; 1 John 5:19) How? Mainly,
the demons use methods designed to mislead people.
(Read 2 Corinthians 2:11.) Let us consider some of
these methods.
9

HOW DEMONS MISLEAD
10 To mislead people, the demons use spiritism. The
practice of spiritism is involvement with the demons,
both in a direct way and through a human medium.
The Bible condemns spiritism and warns us to keep
free from everything connected with it. (Galatians 5:
19-21) Spiritism does for the demons what bait does
for ?shermen. A ?sherman uses a variety of baits to
catch various kinds of ?sh. Similarly, wicked spirits
use di?erent forms of spiritism to bring all sorts of
people under their in?uence.
9. (a) What happened to the demons when they returned to heaven?
(b) We will consider what with regard to the demons?
10. What is spiritism?
126

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

One type of bait used by the demons is divination. What is divination? It is an attempt to ?nd
out about the future or about something unknown.
Some forms of divination are astrology, the use of
tarot cards, crystal gazing, palmistry, and the search
for mysterious omens, or signs, in dreams. Although
many people think that practicing divination is harmless, the Bible shows that fortune-tellers and wicked spirits work together. For instance, Acts 16:16-18
mentions “a demon of divination” that enabled a girl
to practice fortune-telling. But she lost this ability
when the demon was cast out of her.
11

Another way that the demons mislead people is
by encouraging them to inquire of the dead. People
grieving over the death of a loved one are often deceived by wrong ideas about those who have died. A
spirit medium may give special information or may
speak in a voice that seems to be that of a dead person. As a result, many people become convinced that
the dead are really alive and that contacting them will
help the living to endure their grief. But any such
12

11. What is divination, and why should we avoid it?
12. Why is it dangerous to try to communicate with the dead?
Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us

127

HOW TO RESIST WICKED SPIRITS
? Get rid of spiritistic items
? Study the Bible
? Pray to God
“comfort” is really false as well as dangerous. Why?
Because the demons can imitate the voice of a dead
person and give a spirit medium information about
the one who died. (1 Samuel 28:3-19) Moreover, as we
learned in Chapter 6, the dead have ceased to exist.
(Psalm 115:17) So “anyone who inquires of the dead”
has been misled by wicked spirits and is acting contrary to the will of God. (Read Deuteronomy 18:10, 11;
Isaiah 8:19) Therefore, be careful to reject this dangerous bait used by the demons.
13 Wicked spirits not only mislead people but also
frighten them. Today, Satan and his demons know
that they have only “a short period of time” left before they are put out of action, and they are now more
vicious than ever. (Revelation 12:12, 17) Even so,
thousands of people who once lived in daily dread of
13. What have many who once feared the demons been able to do?
128

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

such wicked spirits have been able to break free. How
did they do this? What can a person do even if he is
already involved in spiritism?
HOW TO RESIST WICKED SPIRITS
14 The Bible tells us both how to resist wicked spirits and how to break free from them. Consider the example of the ?rst-century Christians in the city of
Ephesus. Some of them practiced spiritism before becoming Christians. When they decided to break free
from spiritism, what did they do? The Bible says:
“Quite a number of those who practiced magical arts
brought their books together and burned them up
before everybody.” (Acts 19:19) By destroying their
books on magic, those new Christians set an example for those who wish to resist wicked spirits
today. People who want to serve Jehovah need to
get rid of everything related to spiritism. That includes books, magazines, movies, posters, and music
recordings that encourage the practice of spiritism
and make it seem appealing and exciting. Included,
too, are amulets or other items worn for protection
against evil.—1 Corinthians 10:21.
14. Like the ?rst-century Christians in Ephesus, how can we break
free from wicked spirits?
Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us

129

Some years after the Christians in Ephesus destroyed their books on magic, the apostle Paul wrote
them: “We have a struggle . . . against the wicked spirit forces.” (Ephesians 6:12) The demons had not given up. They were still trying to gain an advantage. So,
what else did those Christians need to do? “Besides
all of this,” said Paul, “take up the large shield of
faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the
wicked one’s [Satan’s] burning arrows.” (Ephesians 6:
16) The stronger our shield of faith, the greater our
resistance to wicked spirit forces will be.—Matthew
17:20.
15

How, then, can we strengthen our faith? By studying the Bible. The ?rmness of a wall depends very
much on the strength of its foundation. In the same
way, the ?rmness of our faith depends greatly on the
strength of its base, which is accurate knowledge of
God’s Word, the Bible. If we read and study the Bible daily, our faith will become strong. Like a strong
wall, such faith will shield us from the in?uence of
wicked spirits.—1 John 5:5.
16

15. To resist wicked spirit forces, what do we need to do?
16. How can we strengthen our faith?
130

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

What other step did those Christians in Ephesus
need to take? They needed further protection because
they were living in a city ?lled with demonism. So
Paul told them: “With every form of prayer and supplication . . . carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit.” (Ephesians 6:18) Since we too live in a world full
of demonism, earnestly praying to Jehovah for his
protection is essential in resisting wicked spirits. Of
course, we need to use Jehovah’s name in our prayers.
(Read Proverbs 18:10.) Hence, we should keep on praying to God: “Deliver us from the wicked one,” Satan
the Devil. (Matthew 6:13) Jehovah will answer such
earnest prayers.—Psalm 145:19.
18 Wicked spirits are dangerous, but we need not
live in fear of them if we oppose the Devil and draw
close to God by doing His will. (Read James 4:7, 8.)
The power of wicked spirits is limited. They were
punished in Noah’s day, and they face their ?nal
judgment in the future. (Jude 6) Remember, too, that
we have the protection of Jehovah’s powerful angels.
17

17. What step is necessary in order to resist wicked spirits?
18, 19. (a) Why can we be sure of victory in our ?ght against wicked spirit creatures? (b) What question will be answered in the next
chapter?
Spirit Creatures—How They Affect Us

131

(2 Kings 6:15-17) Those angels are deeply interested
in seeing us succeed in resisting wicked spirits. The
righteous angels are cheering us on, so to speak. Let
us therefore stay close to Jehovah and his family of
faithful spirit creatures. May we also avoid every kind
of spiritism and always apply the counsel of God’s
Word. (1 Peter 5:6, 7; 2 Peter 2:9) Then we can be sure
of victory in our ?ght against wicked spirit creatures.
But why has God tolerated evil spirits and the
wickedness that has caused people so much su?ering? That question will be answered in the next chapter.
19

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Faithful angels come to the aid of those who
serve Jehovah.—Hebrews 1:7, 14.
? Satan and his demons are misleading people
and turning them away from God.
—Revelation 12:9.
? If you do God’s will and oppose the Devil,
Satan will ?ee from you.—James 4:7, 8.

132

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Why Does God Allow Suffering?
Has God caused the su?ering in the world?
What issue was raised in the garden of Eden?
How will God undo the e?ects of
human su?ering?
AFTER a terrible battle in one war-torn land, the
thousands of civilian women and children who had
been killed were buried in a mass grave surrounded by markers. Each marker bore this inscription:
“Why?” Sometimes that is the most painful question
of all. People ask it sadly when war, disaster, disease,
or crime takes their innocent loved ones, destroys
their home, or brings them untold su?ering in other
ways. They want to know why such tragedies befall
them.
2

Why does God allow su?ering? If Jehovah God is

all-powerful, loving, wise, and just, why is the world
1, 2. What kind of su?ering do people face today, leading many to
ask what questions?
Why Does God Allow Suffering?

133

so full of hatred and injustice? Have you ever wondered about these things yourself?
Is it wrong to ask why God allows su?ering? Some
worry that asking such a question means that they do
not have enough faith or that they are showing disrespect for God. When reading the Bible, however,
you will ?nd that faithful, God-fearing people had
similar questions. For example, the prophet Habakkuk asked Jehovah: “Why do you make me witness
wrongdoing? And why do you tolerate oppression?
Why are destruction and violence before me? And
why do quarreling and con?ict abound?”—Habakkuk
1:3.
3

Did Jehovah scold the faithful prophet Habakkuk
for asking such questions? No. Instead, God included Habakkuk’s sincere words in the inspired Bible
record. God also helped him to get a clearer understanding of matters and to gain greater faith. Jehovah
wants to do the same for you. Remember, the Bible
teaches that “he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:7) God
hates wickedness and the su?ering it causes far more
4

3, 4. (a) What shows that it is not wrong to ask why God allows suffering? (b) How does Jehovah feel about wickedness and su?ering?
134

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

than any human does. (Isaiah 55:8, 9) Why, then, is
there so much su?ering in the world?
5

WHY S O MUCH SUFFERING?
People of various religions have gone to their re-

ligious leaders and teachers to ask why there is so
much su?ering. Often, the response is that su?ering
is God’s will and that he long ago determined everything that would ever happen, including tragic events.
Many are told that God’s ways are mysterious or that
he brings death upon people—even children—so that
he can have them in heaven with him. As you have
learned, though, Jehovah God never causes what is
bad. The Bible says: “It is unthinkable for the true
God to act wickedly, for the Almighty to do wrong!”
—Job 34:10.
6

Do you know why people make the mistake of

blaming God for all the su?ering in the world? In
many cases, they blame Almighty God because they
think that he is the real ruler of this world. They do
5. What reasons are sometimes o?ered to explain human su?ering, but
what does the Bible teach?
6. Why do many people make the mistake of blaming God for the suffering in the world?
Why Does God Allow Suffering?

135

not know a simple but important truth that the Bible
teaches. You learned that truth in Chapter 3 of this
book. The real ruler of this world is Satan the Devil.
7

The Bible clearly states: “The whole world is lying

in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19) When
you think about it, does that not make sense? This
world re?ects the personality of the invisible spirit creature who is “misleading the entire inhabited
earth.” (Revelation 12:9) Satan is hateful, deceptive,
and cruel. So the world, under his in?uence, is full of
hatred, deceit, and cruelty. That is one reason why
there is so much su?ering.
A second reason why there is so much su?ering is
that, as discussed in Chapter 3, mankind has been imperfect and sinful ever since the rebellion in the gar8

den of Eden. Sinful humans tend to struggle for dominance, and this results in wars, oppression, and
su?ering. (Ecclesiastes 4:1; 8:9) A third reason for suffering is “time and unexpected events.” (Read Ecclesiastes 9:11.) In a world without Jehovah as a protec7, 8. (a) How does the world re?ect the personality of its ruler?
(b) How have human imperfection and “time and unexpected events”
contributed to su?ering?
136

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

tive Ruler, people may su?er because they happen to
be in the wrong place at the wrong time.
It is comforting for us to know that God does not
cause su?ering. He is not responsible for the wars, the
crimes, the oppression, or even the natural disasters
that cause people to su?er. Still, we need to know,
Why does Jehovah allow all this su?ering? If he is the
Almighty, he has the power to stop it. Why, then,
does he hold back? The loving God that we have
come to know must have a good reason.—1 John 4:8.
9

10

A VITAL IS SUE IS RAISED
To ?nd out why God allows su?ering, we need to

think back to the time when su?ering began. When
Satan led Adam and Eve into disobeying Jehovah, an
important question was raised. Satan did not call into
question Jehovah’s power. Even Satan knows that
there is no limit to Jehovah’s power. Rather, Satan
questioned Jehovah’s right to rule. By calling God a
liar who withholds good from his subjects, Satan
charged that Jehovah is a bad ruler. (Read Genesis 3:
9. Why can we be sure that Jehovah has a good reason for allowing
su?ering to continue?
10. What did Satan call into question, and how?
Why Does God Allow Suffering?

137

2-5.) Satan implied that mankind would be better o?
without God’s rulership. This was an attack on Jehovah’s sovereignty, his right to rule.
Adam and Eve rebelled against Jehovah. In e?ect,
they said: ‘We do not need Jehovah as our Ruler. We
can decide for ourselves what is right and what is
wrong.’ How could Jehovah settle that issue? How
could he teach all intelligent creatures that the rebels were wrong and that his way truly is best? Someone might say that God should simply have destroyed
the rebels and made a fresh start. But Jehovah had
stated his purpose to ?ll the earth with the o?spring
of Adam and Eve, and he wanted them to live in an
earthly paradise. (Genesis 1:28) Jehovah always ful?lls his purposes. (Isaiah 55:10, 11) Besides that, getting rid of the rebels in Eden would not have answered the question that had been raised regarding
Jehovah’s right to rule.
11

Let us consider an illustration. Imagine that a
teacher is telling his students how to solve a di?cult
12

11. Why did Jehovah not just destroy the rebels in Eden?
12, 13. Illustrate why Jehovah has allowed Satan to become the ruler of this world and why God has permitted humans to govern
themselves.
138

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

problem. A clever but rebellious student claims that
the teacher’s way of solving the problem is wrong. Implying that the teacher is not capable, this rebel insists that he knows a much better way to solve the
problem. Some students think that he is right, and
they also become rebellious. What should the teacher do? If he throws the rebels out of the class, what
will be the e?ect on the other students? Will they not
believe that their fellow student and those who joined
him are right? All the other students in the class
might lose respect for the teacher, thinking that he is
afraid of being proved wrong. But suppose that the
teacher allows the rebel to show the class how he
would solve the problem.
Jehovah has done something similar to what the
teacher does. Remember that the rebels in Eden were
not the only ones involved. Millions of angels were
watching. (Job 38:7; Daniel 7:10) How Jehovah handled the rebellion would greatly a?ect all those angels and eventually all intelligent creation. So, what
has Jehovah done? He has allowed Satan to show how
he would rule mankind. God has also allowed humans to govern themselves under Satan’s guidance.
13

Why Does God Allow Suffering?

139

The teacher in our illustration knows that the
rebel and the students on his side are wrong. But he
also knows that allowing them the opportunity to try
to prove their point will bene?t the whole class.
When the rebels fail, all honest students will see that
the teacher is the only one quali?ed to lead the class.
They will understand why the teacher thereafter removes any rebels from the class. Similarly, Jehovah
knows that all honesthearted humans and angels will
bene?t from seeing that Satan and his fellow rebels
have failed and that humans cannot govern themselves. Like Jeremiah of old, they will learn this vital
truth: “I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does
not belong to him. It does not belong to man who is
walking even to direct his step.”—Jeremiah 10:23.
14

WHY S O LONG?
15 Why, though, has Jehovah allowed su?ering to go
on for so long? And why does he not prevent bad

things from happening? Well, consider two things
14. What bene?t will come from Jehovah’s decision to allow humans
to govern themselves?
15, 16. (a) Why has Jehovah allowed su?ering to continue for so
long? (b) Why has Jehovah not prevented such things as horrible
crimes?
140

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

that the teacher in our illustration would not do.
First, he would not stop the rebel student from presenting his case. Second, the teacher would not help
the rebel to make his case. Similarly, consider two
things that Jehovah has determined not to do. First,
he has not stopped Satan and those who side with
him from trying to prove that they are right. Allowing time to pass has thus been necessary. In the thousands of years of human history, mankind has been
able to try every form of self-rule, or human government. Mankind has made some advances in science
and other ?elds, but injustice, poverty, crime, and war
have grown ever worse. Human rule has now been
shown to be a failure.
16

Second, Jehovah has not helped Satan to rule this

world. If God were to prevent horrible crimes, for instance, would he not, in e?ect, be supporting the case
of the rebels? Would God not be making people think
that perhaps humans can govern themselves without
disastrous results? If Jehovah were to act in that way,
he would become party to a lie. However, “it is impossible for God to lie.”—Hebrews 6:18.
Why Does God Allow Suffering?

141

What, though, about all the harm that has been
done during the long rebellion against God? We do
well to remember that Jehovah is almighty. Therefore, he can and will undo the e?ects of mankind’s
su?ering. As we have already learned, the ruining of
our planet will be undone by the turning of the earth
into Paradise. The e?ects of sin will be removed
through faith in Jesus’ ransom sacri?ce, and the effects of death will be reversed by means of the resurrection. God will thus use Jesus “to break up the
works of the Devil.” (1 John 3:8) Jehovah will bring
all of this about at just the right time. We can be glad
that he has not acted sooner, for his patience has given us the opportunity to learn the truth and to serve
him. (Read 2 Peter 3:9, 10.) Meanwhile, God has
been actively seeking sincere worshippers and helping them to endure any su?ering that may come upon
them in this troubled world.—John 4:23; 1 Corinthians 10:13.
17

Some might wonder, ‘Could all this su?ering
have been prevented if God had created Adam and
18

17, 18. What will Jehovah do about all the harm that has resulted
from the rule of humans and the in?uence of Satan?
142

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Eve in such a way that they could not rebel?’ To answer that question, you need to remember a precious
gift that Jehovah has given you.
HOW WILL YOU USE THE GIFT FROM G OD?
19 As was noted in Chapter 5, humans were created
with free will. Do you realize what a precious gift that
is? God has made countless animals, and these are
driven largely by instinct. (Proverbs 30:24) Man has
made some robots that can be programmed to follow
every command. Would we be happy if God had made
us like that? No, we are glad to have the freedom to
make choices about what kind of person to become,
what course of life to pursue, what friendships to
form, and so on. We love to have a measure of freedom, and that is what God wants us to enjoy.

Jehovah is not interested in service performed
under compulsion. (2 Corinthians 9:7) To illustrate:
What would please a parent more—a child’s saying “I
love you” because he is told to say it or his saying it
freely from the heart? So the question is, How will
20

19. What precious gift has Jehovah given us, and why should we value it?
20, 21. How may we use the gift of free will in the best possible way,
and why should we want to do so?
Why Does God Allow Suffering?

143

you use the free will that Jehovah has given you? Satan, Adam, and Eve made the worst possible use of
free will. They rejected Jehovah God. What will
you do?
You have the opportunity to put the marvelous
gift of free will to the best possible use. You can join
the millions who have taken a stand on Jehovah’s
side. They make God rejoice because they take an active part in proving Satan a liar and a miserable failure as a ruler. (Proverbs 27:11) You too can do that
by choosing the right course of life. This will be ex21

plained in the next chapter.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? God does not cause the bad conditions in the
world.—Job 34:10.
? By calling God a liar and saying that He
withholds good from His subjects, Satan
questioned Jehovah’s right to rule.
—Genesis 3:2-5.
? Jehovah will use his Son, the Ruler of the
Messianic Kingdom, to end all human su?ering and to undo its e?ects.—1 John 3:8.
144

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER TWELVE

Living in a Way That Pleases God
How can you become God’s friend?
In what way does Satan’s challenge involve you?
What conduct displeases Jehovah?
How can you live in a way that pleases God?
WHAT kind of person would you choose as a friend?
Very likely you would want the company of someone
who shares your views, interests, and values. And you
would be drawn to one who has ?ne qualities, such
as honesty and kindness.
Throughout history, God has chosen certain humans to be his close friends. For example, Jehovah
called Abraham his friend. (Read Isaiah 41:8; James 2:
23.) God referred to David as “a man agreeable to
my heart” because he was the kind of person Jehovah loves. (Acts 13:22) And Jehovah viewed the prophet Daniel as “someone very precious.”—Daniel 9:23.
2

1, 2. Give some examples of humans whom Jehovah viewed as his
close friends.
Living in a Way That Pleases God

145

3

Why did Jehovah consider Abraham, David, and

Daniel to be his friends? Well, he told Abraham: “You
have listened to my voice.” (Genesis 22:18) So Jehovah draws close to those who humbly do what he asks
of them. “Obey my voice,” he told the Israelites, “and
I will become your God, and you will become my
people.” (Jeremiah 7:23) If you obey Jehovah, you too
can become his friend!
4

JEHOVAH STRENGTHENS HIS FRIENDS
Think about what friendship with God means.

The Bible says that Jehovah is looking for opportunities “to show his strength in behalf of those whose
heart is complete toward him.” (2 Chronicles 16:9)
How can Jehovah show his strength in your behalf ?
One way is brought out at Psalm 32:8, where we
read: “I [Jehovah] will give you insight and instruct
you in the way you should go. I will give you advice with my eye upon you.”
5

What a touching expression of Jehovah’s care! He

will give you needed direction and watch over you
3. Why does Jehovah choose certain humans to be his friends?
4, 5. How does Jehovah show his strength in behalf of his people?
146

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

as you apply it. God wants to help you get through
your trials and tests. (Read Psalm 55:22.) So if you
serve Jehovah with a complete heart, you can be as
con?dent as the psalmist who said: “I keep Jehovah
before me constantly. Because he is at my right
hand, I will never be shaken.” (Psalm 16:8; 63:8) Yes,
Jehovah can help you to live in a way that pleases
him. But, as you know, there is an enemy of God
who would like to keep you from doing this.
6

SATAN’S CHALLENGE
Chapter 11 of this book explained how Satan the

Devil challenged God’s sovereignty. Satan charged
God with lying and implied that Jehovah was unfair
in not letting Adam and Eve decide for themselves
what was right and what was wrong. After Adam
and Eve sinned and as the earth began to be ?lled
with their o?spring, Satan questioned the motive of
all humans. ‘People do not serve God because they
love him,’ Satan charged. ‘Give me a chance, and
I can turn anyone against God.’ The account of
the man named Job shows that this is what Satan
6. What was Satan’s charge regarding humans?
Living in a Way That Pleases God

147

believed. Who was Job, and how was he involved
with Satan’s challenge?
Job lived about 3,600 years ago. He was a good
man, for Jehovah said: “There is no one like him on
7

the earth. He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad.” (Job 1:8) Job
was pleasing to God.
Satan questioned Job’s motive for serving God.
The Devil said to Jehovah: “Have you not put up a
protective hedge around [Job] and his house and
everything he has? You have blessed the work of his
hands, and his livestock has spread out in the land.
But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike
everything he has, and he will surely curse you to
your very face.”—Job 1:10, 11.
8

Satan thus argued that Job served God just for
what he got in return. The Devil also charged that
if Job was tested, he would turn against God. How
did Jehovah respond to Satan’s challenge? Since the
9

issue involved Job’s motive, Jehovah allowed Satan
7, 8. (a) What made Job outstanding among humans of that time?
(b) How did Satan call Job’s motive into question?
9. How did Jehovah respond to Satan’s challenge, and why?
148

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

to test Job. In this way, Job’s love for God—or lack
of it—would be clearly shown.
10

JOB IS TESTED
Satan soon tested Job in a number of ways.

Some of Job’s animals were stolen, and others were
killed. Most of his servants were slaughtered. This
brought economic hardship. Further tragedy struck
when Job’s ten children died in a storm. Despite
these terrible events, however, “Job did not sin or
accuse God of doing anything wrong.”—Job 1:22.
11

Satan did not give up. He must have thought

that although Job could endure the loss of his
possessions, servants, and children, he would turn
against God if he became sick. Jehovah let Satan
strike Job with a disgusting, painful disease. But
even this did not cause Job to lose faith in God.
Rather, he ?rmly said: “Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity!”—Job 27:5.
12

10.
11.
how
12.

Job was not aware that Satan was the cause

What trials befell Job, and how did he react?
(a) What second accusation did Satan make concerning Job, and
did Jehovah respond? (b) How did Job react to his painful disease?
How did Job answer the Devil’s challenge?

Living in a Way That Pleases God

149

of his troubles. Not knowing the details about the
Devil’s challenge of Jehovah’s sovereignty, Job
feared that God was the source of his problems.
(Job 6:4; 16:11-14) Still, he kept his integrity to Jehovah. And Satan’s claim that Job served God for
sel?sh reasons was proved false by Job’s faithful
course!
Job’s faithfulness provided Jehovah with a forceful reply to Satan’s insulting challenge. Job truly was
Jehovah’s friend, and God rewarded him for his
faithful course.—Job 42:12-17.
13

14

HOW YOU ARE INVOLVED
The issue of integrity to God that was raised by

Satan was not directed against Job alone. You too
are involved. This is clearly shown at Proverbs 27:
11, where Jehovah’s Word says: “Be wise, my son,
and make my heart rejoice, so that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.” These words, written
hundreds of years after Job’s death, show that Satan was still taunting God and accusing His servants.
13. What happened because Job was faithful to God?
14, 15. Why can we say that Satan’s challenge involving Job applies
to all humans?
150

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

When we live in a way that pleases Jehovah, we actually help to give an answer to Satan’s false charges,
and in that way we make God’s heart rejoice. How
do you feel about that? Would it not be wonderful
to have a part in answering the Devil’s lying claims,
even if it means making certain changes in your life?
Notice that Satan said: “A man will give everything that he has for his life.” (Job 2:4) By saying
“a man,” Satan made it clear that his charge applied
not just to Job but to all humans. That is a very important point. Satan has called into question your
integrity to God. The Devil would like to see you
disobey God and abandon a righteous course when
di?culties arise. How might Satan try to accomplish
this?
15

As discussed in Chapter 10, Satan uses various
methods to try to turn people away from God. On
the one hand, he attacks “like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” (1 Peter 5:8) Thus Satan’s
in?uence may be seen when friends, relatives, or
others oppose your e?orts to study the Bible and
16

16. (a) By what methods does Satan try to turn people away from
God? (b) How might the Devil use these methods against you?
Living in a Way That Pleases God

151

apply what you learn.1 (John 15:19, 20) On the other hand, Satan “keeps disguising himself as an angel of light.” (2 Corinthians 11:14) The Devil can
use subtle means to mislead you and lure you away
from a godly way of life. He can also use discouragement, perhaps causing you to feel that you are
not good enough to please God. (Proverbs 24:10)
Whether Satan is acting like “a roaring lion” or posing as “an angel of light,” his challenge remains the
same: He says that when you are faced with trials
or temptations, you will stop serving God. How can
you answer his challenge and prove your integrity
to God, as Job did?
OBEYING JEHOVAH’S COMMANDMENTS
17 You can answer Satan’s challenge by living in a

way that pleases God. What does this involve? The
Bible answers: “You must love Jehovah your God
with all your heart and all your soul and all your
1 This does not mean that those who oppose you are personally
controlled by Satan. But Satan is the god of this system of things,
and the whole world is in his power. (2 Corinthians 4:4; 1 John 5:
19) So we can expect that living a godly life will be an unpopular
course, and some will oppose you.

17. What is the main reason to obey Jehovah’s commandments?
152

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

strength.” (Deuteronomy 6:5) As your love for God
grows, you will be ?lled with a desire to do what
he requires of you. “This is what the love of God
means,” wrote the apostle John, “that we observe
his commandments.” If you love Jehovah with your
whole heart, you will ?nd that “his commandments
are not burdensome.”—1 John 5:3.
18

What are Jehovah’s commandments? Some of

them involve conduct that we must avoid. For example, note the box on page 155, entitled “Shun
What Jehovah Hates.” There you will ?nd listed conduct that the Bible clearly condemns. At ?rst glance,
some practices that are listed might not seem so bad.
But after meditating on the cited scriptures, you will
likely see the wisdom of Jehovah’s laws. Making
changes in your conduct may be the greatest challenge you have ever faced. Yet, living in a way that
pleases God brings great satisfaction and happiness.
(Isaiah 48:17, 18) And it is something that is within your reach. How do we know that?
18, 19. (a) What are some of Jehovah’s commandments? (See box on
page 155.) (b) How do we know that God is not asking too much of us?
Living in a Way That Pleases God

153

19

Jehovah never asks more of us than we can do.

(Read Deuteronomy 30:11-14.) He knows our potential and our limitations better than we do. (Psalm
103:14) Moreover, Jehovah can give us the strength
to obey him. The apostle Paul wrote: “God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what
you can bear, but along with the temptation he will
also make the way out so that you may be able to
endure it.” (1 Corinthians 10:13) To help you endure,
Jehovah can even supply you with “power beyond
what is normal.” (2 Corinthians 4:7) After enduring
many trials, Paul could say: “For all things I have
the strength through the one who gives me power.”
—Philippians 4:13.
20

DEVELOPING G ODLY QUALITIES
Of course, more is involved in pleasing Jehovah

than avoiding things that he hates. You also need
to love what he loves. (Romans 12:9) Do you not
feel drawn to those who share your views, interests,
and values? Jehovah does too. So learn to love the
20. What godly qualities should you develop, and why are these important?
154

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

SHUN WHAT JEHOVAH HATES
Manslaughter.—Exodus 20:13; 21:22, 23.
Sexual immorality.—Leviticus 20:10, 13, 15, 16;
Romans 1:24, 26, 27, 32; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.

Spiritism.—Deuteronomy 18:9-13;
1 Corinthians 10:21, 22; Galatians 5:20, 21.

Idolatry.—1 Corinthians 10:14.
Drunkenness.—1 Corinthians 5:11.
Stealing.—Leviticus 6:2, 4; Ephesians 4:28.
Lying.—Proverbs 6:16, 19; Colossians 3:9;
Revelation 22:15.

Greed.—1 Corinthians 5:11.
Violence.—Psalm 11:5; Proverbs 22:24, 25;
Malachi 2:16; Galatians 5:20, 21.

Improper speech.—Leviticus 19:16;
Ephesians 5:4; Colossians 3:8.

Misuse of blood.—Genesis 9:4; Acts 15:20, 28, 29.
Refusal to provide for one’s family.—1 Timothy 5:8.
Participation in wars or political controversies of
this world.—Isaiah 2:4; John 6:15; 17:16.
Use of tobacco or so-called recreational drugs.
—Mark 15:23; 2 Corinthians 7:1.
Living in a Way That Pleases God

155

things that Jehovah holds dear. Some of these are
described in Psalm 15, where we read about those
whom God considers his friends. (Read Psalm 15:
1-5.) Jehovah’s friends display what the Bible calls
“the fruitage of the spirit.” It includes such qualities
as “love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness,
faith, mildness, self-control.”—Galatians 5:22, 23.
21

Reading and studying the Bible regularly will

help you to develop godly qualities. And learning
what God requires will help you to harmonize your
thoughts with God’s thinking. (Isaiah 30:20, 21) The
more you strengthen your love for Jehovah, the
greater will be your desire to live in a way that
pleases God.
22

E?ort is required to live in a way that pleases

Jehovah. The Bible likens changing your life to stripping o? your old personality and clothing yourself
with a new one. (Colossians 3:9, 10) But regarding
Jehovah’s commandments, the psalmist wrote: “In
keeping them, there is a large reward.” (Psalm 19:
21. What will help you to develop godly qualities?
22. What will you accomplish if you live in a way that pleases God?
156

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

11) You too will ?nd that living in a way that pleases God is richly rewarding. By so doing, you will
give an answer to Satan’s challenge and make Jehovah’s heart rejoice!

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? You can become God’s friend by obeying him.
—James 2:23.
? Satan has challenged the integrity of all
humans.—Job 1:8, 10, 11; 2:4; Proverbs 27:11.
? We must shun practices that displease
God.—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.
? We can please Jehovah by hating what he
hates and loving what he loves.—Romans 12:9.

Living in a Way That Pleases God

157

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

A Godly View of Life
How does God view life?
How does God view abortion?
How do we show respect for life?
“JEHOVAH is truly God,” said the prophet Jeremiah. “He is the living God.” (Jeremiah 10:10) Furthermore, Jehovah God is the Creator of all living
things. Heavenly creatures said to him: “You created all things, and because of your will they came
into existence and were created.” (Revelation 4:11)
In a song of praise to God, King David said: “With
you is the source of life.” (Psalm 36:9) Life, then,
is a gift from God.
2

Jehovah also sustains our lives. (Acts 17:28) He

provides the food we eat, the water we drink, the
air we breathe, and the land we live on. (Read Acts
14:15-17.) Jehovah has done this in a way that
1. Who created all living things?
2. What does God do to sustain our lives?
158

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

makes life enjoyable. But to enjoy life to the full,
we need to learn God’s laws and obey them.—Isaiah 48:17, 18.
3

SHOWING RESPECT FOR LIFE
God wants us to have respect for life—both

our own and that of others. Back in the days of
Adam and Eve, for example, their son Cain became
very angry with his younger brother Abel. Jehovah
warned Cain that his anger could lead him to serious sin. Cain ignored that warning. He “assaulted
his brother Abel and killed him.” (Genesis 4:3-8)
Jehovah punished Cain for murdering his brother.
—Genesis 4:9-11.
Thousands of years later, Jehovah gave the people of Israel laws to help them to serve him acceptably. Because these laws were given through the
prophet Moses, they are sometimes called the Mosaic Law. Part of the Mosaic Law said: “You must
not murder.” (Deuteronomy 5:17) This showed the
Israelites that God values human life and that people must value the lives of others.
4

3. How did God view the murder of Abel?
4. In the Mosaic Law, how did God stress the proper view of life?
A Godly View of Life

159

WE SHOW RESPECT FOR LIFE
? by not taking the life of an unborn child
? by rooting out of our heart any hatred for
our fellow man
? by giving up unclean habits
5

What about the life of an unborn child? Well,

according to the Mosaic Law, causing the death of
a baby in its mother’s womb was wrong. Yes, even
such a life is precious to Jehovah. (Read Exodus 21:
22, 23; Psalm 127:3.) This means that abortion is
wrong.
6

Having respect for life includes having the right

view of fellow humans. The Bible says: “Everyone
who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know
that no murderer has everlasting life remaining in
him.” (1 John 3:15) If we want everlasting life, we
need to root out of our heart any hatred for our
fellow man, because hatred is the root cause of
5. How should we view abortion?
6. Why should we not hate our fellow man?
160

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

most violence. (1 John 3:11, 12) It is vital that we
learn to love one another.
What about showing respect for our own life?
People normally do not want to die, but some
risk death for the sake of pleasure. For example,
many use tobacco, chew betel nut, or take drugs
for recreational purposes. Such substances harm
the body and often kill the users. A person who
makes it a practice to use these substances does
not view life as sacred. These practices are unclean
in God’s eyes. (Read Romans 6:19; 12:1; 2 Corinthians 7:1.) To serve God acceptably, we have to give
up such practices, even though doing so might be
very hard. Jehovah can give us the needed help,
and he appreciates the e?ort we make to treat our
life as a precious gift from him.
7

If we have respect for life, we will keep in mind
the need to be safety conscious. We will not be
careless and will not take risks just for pleasure or
excitement. We will avoid reckless driving and violent or dangerous sports. (Psalm 11:5) God’s Law
8

7. What are some practices that show a disrespect for life?
8. Why should we keep in mind the need to be safety conscious?
A Godly View of Life

161

for ancient Israel stated: “If you build a new house
[with a ?at roof], you must also make a parapet
[or, low wall] for your roof, so that you may not
bring bloodguilt on your house because of someone falling from it.” (Deuteronomy 22:8) In harmony with the principle set out in that law, keep such
things as stairs in your home in good condition so
that someone does not trip, fall, and get badly
hurt. If you own a car, make sure that it is safe to
drive. Do not let either your home or your car be
a danger to you or to others.
What about the life of an animal? That too is
sacred to the Creator. God permits the killing of
animals to obtain food and clothing or to protect people from danger. (Genesis 3:21; 9:3; Exodus
21:28) However, being cruel to animals or killing
them just for sport is wrong and shows utter disregard for the sacredness of life.—Proverbs 12:10.
9

10

SHOWING RESPECT FOR BLO OD
After Cain killed his brother Abel, Jehovah

told Cain: “Your brother’s blood is crying out to
9. If we have respect for life, how will we treat animals?
10. How has God shown that there is a link between life and blood?
162

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

me from the ground.” (Genesis 4:10) When God
spoke of Abel’s blood, he was speaking of Abel’s
life. Cain had taken Abel’s life, and now Cain
would have to be punished. It was as if Abel’s
blood, or life, were crying out to Jehovah for justice. The connection between life and blood was
again shown after the Flood of Noah’s day. Before the Flood, humans ate only fruits, vegetables,
grains, and nuts. After the Flood, Jehovah told
Noah and his sons: “Every moving animal that is
alive may serve as food for you.” However, God
set this restriction: “Only ?esh with its life—its
blood—you must not eat.” (Genesis 1:29; 9:3, 4)
Clearly, Jehovah links very closely the life and the
blood of a creature.
11

We show respect for blood by not eating it. In

the Law that Jehovah gave the Israelites, he commanded: “If one of the Israelites . . . is hunting and
catches a wild animal or a bird that may be eaten,
he must pour its blood out and cover it with dust.
. . . I said to the Israelites: ‘You must not eat the
11. What use of blood has God forbidden since the days of Noah?
A Godly View of Life

163

blood of any sort of ?esh.’” (Leviticus 17:13, 14)
God’s command not to eat animal blood, ?rst given to Noah some 800 years earlier, was still in
force. Jehovah’s view was clear: His servants could
eat animal meat but not the blood. They were to
pour the blood on the ground—in e?ect, returning
the creature’s life to God.
12

A similar command rests upon Christians. The

apostles and other men taking the lead among Jesus’ followers in the ?rst century met together to
decide what commands had to be obeyed by all in
the Christian congregation. They came to this conclusion: “The holy spirit and we ourselves have
favored adding no further burden to you except
these necessary things: to keep abstaining from
things sacri?ced to idols, from blood, from what
is strangled [“what is killed without draining its
blood,” footnote], and from sexual immorality.”
(Acts 15:28, 29; 21:25) So we must ‘keep abstaining
from blood.’ In God’s eyes, our doing that is as im12. What command regarding blood was given by holy spirit in the ?rst
century and still applies today?
164

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

portant as our avoiding idolatry and sexual immorality.
13

Does the command to abstain from blood in-

clude blood transfusions? Yes. To illustrate: Suppose a doctor were to tell you to abstain from alcoholic beverages. Would that simply mean that
you should not drink alcohol but that you could
have it injected into your veins? Of course not!
Likewise, abstaining from blood means not taking
it into our bodies at all. So the command to abstain from blood means that we would not allow
anyone to transfuse blood into our veins.
14

What if a Christian is badly injured or is in

need of major surgery? Suppose doctors say that
he must have a blood transfusion or he will die. Of
course, the Christian would not want to die. In an
e?ort to preserve God’s precious gift of life, he
would accept other kinds of treatment that do
not involve the misuse of blood. Hence, he would
13. Illustrate why the command to abstain from blood includes blood
transfusions.
14, 15. If doctors say that a Christian must have a blood transfusion,
how would he react, and why?
A Godly View of Life

165

seek such medical attention if that is available and
would accept a variety of alternatives to blood.
Would a Christian break God’s law just to stay
alive a little longer in this system of things? Jesus
said: “Whoever wants to save his life will lose it,
but whoever loses his life for my sake will ?nd it.”
(Matthew 16:25) We do not want to die. But if we
tried to save our present life by breaking God’s
law, we would be in danger of losing everlasting
life. We are wise, then, to put our trust in the
rightness of God’s law, with full con?dence that if
we die from any cause, our Life-Giver will remember us in the resurrection and restore to us the
precious gift of life.—John 5:28, 29; Hebrews 11:6.
16 Today, faithful servants of God ?rmly resolve
to follow his direction regarding blood. They will
not eat it in any form. Nor will they accept blood
for medical reasons.1 They are sure that the Creator of blood knows what is best for them. Do you
believe that he does?
15

1 For information on alternatives to blood transfusion, see pages 13-17 of the brochure How Can Blood Save Your Life? published
by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

16. What do God’s servants ?rmly resolve regarding blood?
166

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

THE ONLY PROPER USE OF BLO OD
17 The Mosaic Law emphasized the one proper
use of blood. Regarding the worship required of
the ancient Israelites, Jehovah commanded: “The
life of the ?esh is in the blood, and I myself have
given it on the altar for you to make atonement
for yourselves, because it is the blood that makes
atonement.” (Leviticus 17:11) When the Israelites
sinned, they could obtain forgiveness by o?ering an
animal and having some of its blood put on the altar at the tabernacle or later at God’s temple. The
only proper use of blood was in such sacri?ces.

True Christians are not under the Mosaic Law
and therefore do not o?er animal sacri?ces and
put the blood of animals on an altar. (Hebrews
10:1) However, the use of blood on the altar in the
days of ancient Israel pointed forward to the precious sacri?ce of God’s Son, Jesus Christ. As we
learned in Chapter 5 of this book, Jesus gave his
human life for us by letting his blood be shed as a
18

17. In ancient Israel, what was the one use of blood that was acceptable to Jehovah God?
18. What bene?ts and blessings can we gain from the shedding of Jesus’ blood?
A Godly View of Life

167

sacri?ce. Then he ascended to heaven and once for
all time o?ered the value of his shed blood to God.
(Hebrews 9:11, 12) That laid the basis for the forgiveness of our sins and opened the way for us to
gain everlasting life. (Matthew 20:28; John 3:16)
How extremely important that use of blood has
proved to be! (1 Peter 1:18, 19) Only by means of
faith in the merit of Jesus’ shed blood can we gain
salvation.
We can be so grateful to Jehovah God for the
loving provision of life! And should that not motivate us to tell others about the opportunity to gain
everlasting life on the basis of faith in Jesus’ sacri?ce? Godly concern for the lives of fellow humans
will move us to do this with eagerness and zeal.
(Read Ezekiel 3:17-21.) If we diligently ful?ll this responsibility, we will be able to say, as did the apostle Paul: “I am clean from the blood of all men, for
I have not held back from telling you all the counsel of God.” (Acts 20:26, 27) Telling people about
God and his purposes is a ?ne way to show that
we have the highest regard for life and blood.
19

19. What must we do in order to be “clean from the blood of all men”?
168

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Life is a gift from God.—Psalm 36:9;
Revelation 4:11.
? Abortion is wrong, since the life of an unborn
child is precious in God’s eyes.
—Exodus 21:22, 23; Psalm 127:3.
? We show respect for life by not endangering it
and by not eating blood.—Deuteronomy 5:17;
Acts 15:28, 29.

A Godly View of Life

169

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

How to Make Your Family Life Happy
What is needed to be a good husband?
How can a woman succeed as a wife?
What is involved in being a ?ne parent?
How can children help to make
family life happy?
JEHOVAH GOD wants your family life to be happy. His Word, the Bible, provides guidelines for
each family member, describing the role that God
wants each one to play. When family members ful?ll their roles in harmony with God’s counsel, the
results are very satisfying. Jesus said: “Happy are
those hearing the word of God and keeping it!”
—Luke 11:28.
2

Family happiness depends mainly on our rec-

ognizing that the family originates with Jehovah,
the one Jesus called “Our Father.” (Matthew 6:9)
1. What is the key to a happy family life?
2. Family happiness depends on our recognizing what?
170

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Every family on earth exists because of our heavenly Father—and he certainly knows what makes
families happy. (Ephesians 3:14, 15) So, what does
the Bible teach about the role of each family member?
3

DIVINE ORIGIN OF THE FAMILY
Jehovah created the ?rst humans, Adam and

Eve, and brought them together as husband and
wife. He put them in a beautiful earthly paradise
home—the garden of Eden—and told them to have
children. “Be fruitful and become many, ?ll the
earth and subdue it,” said Jehovah. (Genesis 1:2628; 2:18, 21-24) This is not just a story or a myth,
for Jesus showed that what Genesis says about the
start of family life is true. (Matthew 19:4, 5) Although we face many problems and life now is not
as God purposed it to be, let us see why happiness
within the family is possible.
4

Each member of the family can help to make

3. How does the Bible describe the start of the human family, and why
do we know that what it says is true?
4. (a) How can each member of the family contribute to its happiness?
(b) Why is studying the life of Jesus so important to family happiness?
How to Make Your Family Life Happy

171

family life happy by imitating God in showing love.
(Ephesians 5:1, 2) How, though, can we imitate
God, since we cannot even see him? We can learn
how Jehovah acts because he sent his ?rstborn Son
from heaven to the earth. (John 1:14, 18) When on
earth, this Son, Jesus Christ, imitated his heavenly
Father so well that seeing and listening to Jesus
was just like being with Jehovah and hearing Him.
(John 14:9) Therefore, by learning about the love
that Jesus showed and following his example, each
one of us can help to make family life happier.
5

A MODEL FOR HUSBANDS
The Bible says that husbands should treat their

wives in the same way that Jesus treats his disciples. Consider this Bible direction: “Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved
the congregation and gave himself up for it . . . In the
same way husbands should love their wives as their
own bodies. A man who loves his wife loves himself, for no man ever hated his own body, but he
5, 6. (a) How does the way Jesus treats the congregation set an example for husbands? (b) What must be done to get forgiveness of sins?
172

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

feeds and cherishes it, just as the Christ does the
congregation.”—Ephesians 5:23, 25-29.
Jesus’ love for his congregation of disciples sets
a perfect example for husbands. Jesus “loved them
to the end,” sacrificing his life for them, even
though they were far from perfect. (John 13:1; 15:
13) Similarly, husbands are urged: “Keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with
them.” (Colossians 3:19) What will help a husband
to apply such counsel, especially if his wife at
times fails to act with discretion? He should remember his own mistakes and what he must do to
receive God’s forgiveness. What is that? He must
forgive those who sin against him, and that includes his wife. Of course, she should do the same.
(Read Matthew 6:12, 14, 15.) Do you see why some
have said that a successful marriage is the union
of two good forgivers?
6

Husbands also do well to note that Jesus always showed consideration for his disciples. He
took into account their limitations and physical
7

7. What did Jesus take into account, setting what example for husbands?
How to Make Your Family Life Happy

173

needs. When they were tired, for example, he said:
“Come, you yourselves, privately into an isolated
place and rest up a little.” (Mark 6:30-32) Wives
too deserve thoughtful consideration. The Bible describes them as “a weaker vessel” to whom husbands are commanded to assign “honor.” Why? Because both husbands and wives share equally in
“the undeserved favor of life.” (1 Peter 3:7) Husbands should remember that it is faithfulness, not
whether a person is male or female, that makes one
precious to God.—Psalm 101:6.
8

The Bible says that a husband “who loves his

wife loves himself.” This is because a man and his
wife “are no longer two, but one ?esh,” as Jesus
pointed out. (Matthew 19:6) So they must limit
their sexual interests to each other. (Proverbs 5:1521; Hebrews 13:4) They can do this if they show
unsel?sh concern for each other’s needs. (1 Corinthians 7:3-5) Noteworthy is the reminder: “No man
ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes
8. (a) How is it that a husband “who loves his wife loves himself”?
(b) B eing “one ?esh” means what for a husband and his wife?
174

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

it.” Husbands need to love their wives as they do
themselves, remembering that they are accountable
to their own head, Jesus Christ.—Ephesians 5:29;
1 Corinthians 11:3.
The apostle Paul spoke of the ‘tender a?ection
that Christ Jesus has.’ (Philippians 1:8) Jesus’ tenderness was a refreshing quality, one that was appealing to women who became his disciples. (John
20:1, 11-13, 16) And wives yearn for tender a?ection from their husbands.
9

AN EXAMPLE FOR WIVES
10 A family is an organization, and to operate
smoothly, it needs a head. Even Jesus has One he

submits to as his Head. “The head of the Christ is
God,” just as “the head of a woman is the man.”
(1 Corinthians 11:3) Jesus’ submission to God’s
headship is a ?ne example, since all of us have a
head to whom we must submit.
11

Imperfect men make mistakes and often fall

9. What quality of Jesus is mentioned at Philippians 1:8, and why
should husbands display this quality toward their wives?
10. How does Jesus provide an example for wives?
11. What attitude is a wife to have toward her husband, and what may
be the e?ect of her conduct?
How to Make Your Family Life Happy

175

far short of being ideal family heads. So, what
should a wife do? She should not belittle what her
husband does or try to take over his headship. A
wife does well to remember that in God’s view, a
quiet and mild spirit is of great value. (1 Peter 3:4)
By displaying such a spirit, she will ?nd it easier
to demonstrate godly subjection, even under trying
circumstances. Furthermore, the Bible says: “The
wife should have deep respect for her husband.”
(Ephesians 5:33) But what if he does not accept
Christ as his Head? The Bible urges wives: “Be in
subjection to your husbands, so that if any are not
obedient to the word, they may be won without a
word through the conduct of their wives, because
of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct
together with deep respect.”—1 Peter 3:1, 2.
12

Whether her husband is a fellow believer or

not, a wife is not showing disrespect if she tactfully expresses an opinion that di?ers from his. Her
viewpoint may be correct, and the whole family
could bene?t if he listened to her. Although Abra12. Why is it not wrong for a wife to express her opinions respectfully?
176

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

ham did not agree when his wife, Sarah, recommended a practical solution to a certain household
problem, God told him: “Listen to her.” (Read Genesis 21:9-12.) Of course, when a husband makes a
?nal decision that does not con?ict with God’s law,
his wife shows her subjection by supporting it.
—Acts 5:29; Ephesians 5:24.
13

In ful?lling her role, a wife can do much in

caring for the family. For example, the Bible shows
that married women are “to love their husbands, to
love their children, to be sound in mind, chaste,
working at home, good, subjecting themselves to
their own husbands.” (Titus 2:4, 5) A wife and
mother who acts in this way will gain the lasting
love and respect of her family. (Read Proverbs 31:
10, 28.) Since marriage is a union of imperfect
individuals, however, some extreme circumstances
may result in separation or divorce. The Bible allows for separation under certain circumstances.
Yet, separation must not be taken lightly, for the
13. (a) What does Titus 2:4, 5 urge married women to do? (b) What
does the Bible say about separation and divorce?
How to Make Your Family Life Happy

177

Bible counsels: “A wife should not separate from
her husband . . . , and a husband should not leave
his wife.” (1 Corinthians 7:10, 11) And only sexual
immorality by one of the marriage mates provides
Scriptural grounds for divorce.—Matthew 19:9.
14

A PERFECT EXAMPLE FOR PARENTS
Jesus set a perfect example for parents in the

way he treated children. When others tried to prevent the little ones from approaching Jesus, he
said: “Let the young children come to me; do not
try to stop them.” The Bible says that he then
“took the children into his arms and began blessing them, laying his hands on them.” (Mark 10:1316) Since Jesus took time for little ones, should
you not do the same for your own sons and daughters? They need, not small bits of your time, but
large amounts of it. You need to take time to teach
them, for that is what Jehovah instructs parents to
do.—Read Deuteronomy 6:4-9.
15

As this world becomes ever more wicked, chil-

14. How did Jesus treat children, and what do children need from parents?
15. What can parents do to protect their children?
178

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

dren need parents who will protect them from
people who seek to harm them, such as sexual
predators. Consider how Jesus protected his disciples, whom he a?ectionately called “little children.” When he was arrested and would soon be
killed, Jesus made a way for them to escape. (John
13:33; 18:7-9) As a parent, you need to be alert to
the Devil’s attempts to harm your little ones. You
need to give them advance warning.1 (1 Peter 5:8)
Never before has the threat to their physical, spiritual, and moral safety been greater.
16

On the night before Jesus died, his disciples ar-

gued about who was greatest among them. Rather
than become angry with them, Jesus lovingly continued to appeal to them by word and example.
(Luke 22:24-27; John 13:3-8) If you are a parent,
can you see how you might follow Jesus’ example
in the way you correct your children? True, they
need discipline, but it should be given to “the
1 Help in protecting children is found in chapter 32 of the book
Learn From the Great Teacher, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

16. What can parents learn from the way that Jesus handled his disciples’ imperfections?
How to Make Your Family Life Happy

179

proper degree,” never in anger. You would not use
thoughtless speech, which is “like the stabs of a
sword.” (Jeremiah 30:11; Proverbs 12:18) Discipline
should be delivered in such a way that your child
will later see how appropriate it was.—Ephesians
6:4; Hebrews 12:9-11.
17

A MODEL FOR CHILDREN
Can children learn from Jesus? Yes, they can!

By his own example, Jesus showed how children
should obey their parents. “Just as the Father
taught me,” he said, “I speak.” He added: “I always do the things pleasing to him.” (John 8:28,
29) Jesus was obedient to his heavenly Father,
and the Bible tells children to obey their parents.
(Read Ephesians 6:1-3.) Although Jesus was a perfect child, he obeyed his human parents, Joseph
and Mary, who were imperfect. That surely contributed to the happiness of every member of Jesus’ family!—Luke 2:4, 5, 51, 52.
18

Can children see ways that they can be more

17. In what ways did Jesus set a perfect example for children?
18. Why did Jesus always obey his heavenly Father, and who is happy
when children obey their parents today?
180

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

like Jesus and make their parents happy? True,
young ones may sometimes ?nd it hard to obey
their parents, but that is what God wants children
to do. (Proverbs 1:8; 6:20) Jesus always obeyed
his heavenly Father, even under di?cult circumstances. Once, when it was God’s will that Jesus
do something especially hard, Jesus said: “Remove
this cup [a certain requirement] from me.” Nevertheless, Jesus did what God asked, because he realized that his Father knew best. (Luke 22:42) By
learning to be obedient, children will make their
parents and their heavenly Father very happy.1
—Proverbs 23:22-25.
19 The Devil tempted Jesus, and we can be sure
that he will also tempt young ones to do what is
wrong. (Matthew 4:1-10) Satan the Devil uses peer
pressure, which can be hard to resist. How vital
it is, then, that children not keep company with
wrongdoers! (1 Corinthians 15:33) Jacob’s daughter Dinah kept company with those who did not
1 Only if a parent asked a child to break God’s law would it be
right for the child to disobey.—Acts 5:29.

19. (a) How does Satan tempt children? (b) What e?ect can the bad
behavior of children have on parents?
How to Make Your Family Life Happy

181

worship Jehovah, and this led to a lot of trouble.
(Genesis 34:1, 2) Think of how the family could be
hurt if one of its members were to become involved in sexual immorality!—Proverbs 17:21, 25.
20

THE KEY TO FAMILY HAPPINES S
Family problems are easier to cope with when

Bible counsel is applied. In fact, applying such
counsel is the key to family happiness. So husbands, love your wife, and treat her as Jesus treats
his congregation. Wives, submit to the headship of
your husband, and follow the example of the capable wife described at Proverbs 31:10-31. Parents,
train your children. (Proverbs 22:6) Fathers, ‘preside over your household in a ?ne manner.’ (1 Timothy 3:4, 5; 5:8) And children, obey your parents.
(Colossians 3:20) None in the family are perfect,
for all make mistakes. So be humble, asking one
another for forgiveness.
21

Truly, the Bible contains a wealth of valu-

able counsel and instruction regarding family life.
20. To enjoy happy family life, what must each family member do?
21. What wonderful prospects lie ahead, and how can we enjoy happy
family life now?
182

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Moreover, it teaches us about God’s new world
and an earthly paradise ?lled with happy people
who worship Jehovah. (Revelation 21:3, 4) What
wonderful prospects lie ahead! Even now, we can
enjoy happy family life by applying God’s instructions found in his Word, the Bible.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Husbands need to love their wives as their own
bodies.—Ephesians 5:25-29.
? Wives should love their family and respect
their husbands.—Titus 2:4, 5.
? Parents need to love, teach, and protect their
children.—Deuteronomy 6:4-9.
? Children need to obey their parents.
—Ephesians 6:1-3.

How to Make Your Family Life Happy

183

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Worship That God Approves
Are all religions pleasing to God?
How can we identify the true religion?
Who are God’s true worshippers on earth today?
JEHOVAH GOD deeply cares for us and wants us to
bene?t from his loving direction. If we worship him
in the right way, we will be happy and will avoid many
problems in life. We will also have his blessing and
his help. (Isaiah 48:17) There are, however, hundreds
of religions that claim to teach the truth about God.
Yet, they di?er greatly in their teachings about who
God is and what he expects of us.
2 How can you know the right way to worship Jehovah? You do not have to study and compare the
teachings of all the many religions. You need only
learn what the Bible really teaches about true worship. To illustrate: In many lands, there is a problem
1. How will we bene?t if we worship God in the right way?
2. How can we learn the right way to worship Jehovah, and what illustration helps us to understand this?
184

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

with counterfeit money. If you were given the job of
picking out such false money, how would you go
about it? By memorizing every kind of counterfeit?
No. Your time would be better spent if you studied
real money. After you knew what real money looked
like, you could recognize a counterfeit. Similarly,
when we learn how to identify the true religion, we
can recognize those religions that are false.
It is important that we worship Jehovah in the
way that he approves. Many people believe that all
religions are pleasing to God, but the Bible does not
teach that. It is not even enough just to claim to be a
Christian. Jesus said: “Not everyone saying to me,
‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the Kingdom of the heavens, but only the one doing the will of my Father who
is in the heavens will.” To have God’s approval, therefore, we must learn what God requires of us and do
it. Jesus called those who do not do God’s will “workers of lawlessness.” (Matthew 7:21-23) Like counterfeit money, false religion has no real value. Even
worse, such religion is actually harmful.
3

3. According to Jesus, what must we do if we want to have God’s approval?
Worship That God Approves

185

Jehovah gives everyone on earth the opportunity
to gain everlasting life. To have eternal life in Paradise, however, we must worship God properly and
live now in a way that is acceptable to him. Sadly,
many refuse to do so. That is why Jesus said: “Go in
through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate
and spacious is the road leading o? into destruction,
and many are going in through it; whereas narrow is
the gate and cramped the road leading o? into life,
and few are ?nding it.” (Matthew 7:13, 14) True religion leads to everlasting life. False religion leads to
destruction. Jehovah does not want any human to be
destroyed, and that is why he is giving people everywhere an opportunity to learn about him. (2 Peter
3:9) Really, then, the way we worship God means either life or death for us.
4

HOW TO IDENTIFY THE TRUE RELIGION
5 How can ‘the road to life’ be found? Jesus said

that the true religion would be evident in the lives of
the people who practice it. “By their fruits you will
4. What do Jesus’ words concerning the two roads mean, and where
does each road lead?
5. How can we recognize those who practice the true religion?
186

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

recognize them,” he said. “Every good tree produces
?ne fruit.” (Matthew 7:16, 17) In other words, those
who practice the true religion would be recognized by
their beliefs and their conduct. Although they are not
perfect and they make mistakes, true worshippers as
a group seek to do God’s will. Let us consider six features that identify those who practice true religion.
God’s servants base their teachings on the Bible. The
Bible itself says: “All Scripture is inspired of God
and bene?cial for teaching, for reproving, for setting
things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, so
that the man [or woman] of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”
(2 Timothy 3:16, 17) To his fellow Christians, the
apostle Paul wrote: “When you received God’s word,
which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the
word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word
of God.” (1 Thessalonians 2:13) Hence, beliefs and
practices of the true religion are not based on human
views or tradition. They originate in God’s inspired
Word, the Bible.
6

6, 7. How do God’s servants view the Bible, and how did Jesus set the
example in this regard?
Worship That God Approves

187

THOSE WHO WORSHIP THE TRUE GOD
? base their teachings on the Bible
? worship only Jehovah and make his name
known
? show genuine love for one another
? accept Jesus as God’s means of salvation
? are no part of the world
? preach God’s Kingdom as man’s only hope
Jesus Christ set the proper example by basing his
teachings on God’s Word. In prayer to his heavenly
Father, he said: “Your word is truth.” (John 17:17) Jesus believed the Word of God, and everything he
taught harmonized with the Scriptures. Jesus often
said: “It is written.” (Matthew 4:4, 7, 10) Then Jesus
would quote a scripture. Similarly, God’s people today do not teach their own ideas. They believe that
the Bible is God’s Word, and they base their teachings ?rmly on what it says.
8 Those who practice the true religion worship only Jehovah and make his name known. Jesus declared: “It is
Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him
7

8. What is involved in worshipping Jehovah?
188

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

alone you must render sacred service.” (Matthew 4:
10) Thus, God’s servants worship no one other than
Jehovah. This worship includes letting people know
what the name of the true God is and what he is like.
Psalm 83:18 states: “You, whose name is Jehovah, you
alone are the Most High over all the earth.” Jesus set
the pattern in helping others to get to know God, as
he said in prayer: “I have made your name manifest
to the men whom you gave me out of the world.”
(John 17:6) Similarly, true worshippers today teach
others about God’s name, his purposes, and his qualities.
9 God’s people show genuine, unsel?sh love for one another. Jesus said: “By this all will know that you are
my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”
(John 13:35) The early Christians had such love for
one another. Godly love overcomes racial, social, and
national barriers and draws people together in an unbreakable bond of true brotherhood. (Read Colossians
3:14.) Members of false religions do not have such a
loving brotherhood. How do we know that? They kill
one another because of national or ethnic di?erences.
9, 10. In what ways do true Christians show love for one another?
Worship That God Approves

189

True Christians do not take up weapons to kill their
Christian brothers or anyone else. The Bible states:
“The children of God and the children of the Devil
are evident by this fact: Whoever does not practice
righteousness does not originate with God, nor does
the one who does not love his brother. . . . We should
love one another; not like Cain, who originated with
the wicked one and slaughtered his brother.”—1 John
3:10-12; 4:20, 21.
10 Of course, genuine love means more than not killing others. True Christians unsel?shly use their time,
energy, and resources to help and encourage one another. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) They help one another in
times of distress, and they deal honestly with others.
In fact, they apply in their lives the Bible counsel to
“work what is good toward all.”—Galatians 6:10.
11 True Christians accept Jesus Christ as God’s means
of salvation. The Bible says: “There is no salvation in
anyone else, for there is no other name under heaven
that has been given among men by which we must get
saved.” (Acts 4:12) As we saw in Chapter 5, Jesus gave
his life as a ransom for obedient humans. (Matthew
11. Why is it important to accept Jesus Christ as God’s means of salvation?
190

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

20:28) In addition, Jesus is God’s appointed King in
the heavenly Kingdom that will rule the entire earth.
And God requires that we obey Jesus and apply his
teachings if we want everlasting life. That is why the
Bible states: “The one who exercises faith in the Son
has everlasting life; the one who disobeys the Son will
not see life.”—John 3:36.
12 True worshippers are no part of the world. When on
trial before the Roman ruler Pilate, Jesus said: “My
Kingdom is no part of this world.” (John 18:36) No
matter what country they live in, Jesus’ true followers are subjects of his heavenly Kingdom and thus
maintain strict neutrality in the world’s political affairs. They take no part in its con?icts. However, Jehovah’s worshippers do not interfere with what others choose to do about joining a political party,
running for o?ce, or voting. And while God’s true
worshippers are neutral regarding politics, they are
law-abiding. Why? Because God’s Word commands
them to “be in subjection” to the governmental “superior authorities.” (Romans 13:1) Where there is
a con?ict between what God requires and what a
12. What does being no part of the world involve?
Worship That God Approves

191

political system requires, true worshippers follow the
example of the apostles, who said: “We must obey
God as ruler rather than men.”—Acts 5:29; Mark
12:17.
13 Jesus’ true followers preach that God’s Kingdom is
mankind’s only hope. Jesus foretold: “This good news
of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited
earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end
will come.” (Matthew 24:14) Instead of encouraging
people to look to human rulers to solve their problems, true followers of Jesus Christ proclaim God’s
heavenly Kingdom as the only hope for mankind.
(Psalm 146:3) Jesus taught us to pray for that perfect
government when he said: “Let your Kingdom come.
Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.”
(Matthew 6:10) God’s Word foretold that this heavenly Kingdom “will crush and put an end to all these
kingdoms [now existing], and it alone will stand forever.”—Daniel 2:44; Revelation 16:14; 19:19-21.
14 On the basis of what we have just considered, ask
13. How do Jesus’ true followers view God’s Kingdom, and therefore,
what action do they take?
14. What religious group do you believe meets the requirements for
true worship?
192

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

yourself: ‘What religious group bases all its teachings on the Bible and makes known Jehovah’s name?
What group practices godly love, exercises faith in Jesus, is no part of the world, and proclaims that God’s
Kingdom is the only real hope for mankind? Of all
the religious groups on earth, which one meets all
these requirements?’ The facts clearly show that it is
Jehovah’s Witnesses.—Read Isaiah 43:10-12.
WHAT WILL YOU D O?
15 Simply believing in God is not enough to please
him. After all, the Bible says that even the demons believe that God exists. (James 2:19) Obviously, though,
they do not do God’s will and do not have his approval. To be approved by God, not only must we believe
in his existence but we must also do his will. We must
also break free from false religion and embrace true
worship.

The apostle Paul showed that we must not take
part in false worship. He wrote: “ ‘Get out from
among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah,
‘and quit touching the unclean thing’; ‘and I will
16

15. What does God require in addition to believing that he exists?
16. What should be done about taking part in false religion?
Worship That God Approves

193

take you in.’ ” (2 Corinthians 6:17; Isaiah 52:11) True
Christians therefore avoid anything that is connected
with false worship.
17

The Bible shows that all the many forms of false

religion are part of “Babylon the Great.”1 (Revelation
17:5) That name calls to mind the ancient city of Babylon, where false religion started up after the Flood
of Noah’s day. Many teachings and practices now
common in false religion originated long ago in Babylon. For example, the Babylonians worshipped trinities, or triads, of gods. Today, the central doctrine of
many religions is the Trinity. But the Bible clearly
teaches that there is only one true God, Jehovah, and
that Jesus Christ is his Son. (John 17:3) The Babylonians also believed that humans have an immortal
soul that survives the body after death and can suffer in a place of torment. Today, belief in the immortal soul or spirit that can su?er in hell?re is taught
by most religions.
1 For more information about why Babylon the Great represents
the world empire of false religion, see the Appendix, pages 281-283.

17, 18. What is “Babylon the Great,” and why is it urgent to “get out
of her”?
194

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

18

Sinc e ancient B abylonian worship spread

throughout the earth, modern-day Babylon the Great
can properly be identi?ed as the world empire of
false religion. And God has foretold that this empire
of false religion will come to a sudden end. Do you
see why it is vital that you separate yourself from
every part of Babylon the Great? Jehovah God wants
you to “get out of her” quickly while there is still
time.—Read Revelation 18:4, 8.
19

As a result of your decision to quit practicing

false religion, some may choose to stop associating
with you. By serving Jehovah with his people, however, you will gain far more than you could ever lose.
Like Jesus’ early disciples who left other things to follow him, you will come to have many spiritual brothers and sisters. You will become part of a large worldwide family of millions of true Christians, who show
you genuine love. And you will have the wonderful
hope of everlasting life “in the coming system of
things.” (Read Mark 10:28-30.) Perhaps, in time, those
who abandoned you because of your beliefs will look
19. What will you gain by serving Jehovah?
Worship That God Approves

195

into what the Bible teaches and become worshippers
of Jehovah.
20 The Bible teaches that God will soon bring an
end to this wicked system of things and will replace
it with a righteous new world under the rulership of
his Kingdom. (2 Peter 3:9, 13) What a marvelous
world that will be! And in that righteous new system,
there will be only one religion, one true form of worship. Is it not the course of wisdom for you to take
the necessary steps to come into association with true
worshippers right now?
20. What does the future hold for those who practice the true religion?

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? There is only one true religion.
—Matthew 7:13, 14.
? True religion is identi?ed by its teachings and
practices.—Matthew 7:16, 17.
? Jehovah’s Witnesses practice the worship that
God approves.—Isaiah 43:10.

196

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Take Your Stand for True Worship
What does the Bible teach about
the use of images?
What view do Christians take of
religious holidays?
How can you explain your beliefs to others
without o?ending them?
SUPPOSE you found out that your whole neighborhood has been contaminated. Someone has secretly
been dumping poisonous waste in the area, and now
the situation is life threatening. What would you do?
No doubt, you would move away if you could. But after doing that, you would still face this serious question, ‘Have I been poisoned?’
A similar situation arises with regard to false religion. The Bible teaches that such worship is contaminated with unclean teachings and practices. (2 Corinthians 6:17) That is why it is important for you to get
2

1, 2. What question must you ask yourself after leaving false religion,
and why do you think this is important?
Take Your Stand for True Worship

197

out of “Babylon the Great,” the world empire of false
religion. (Revelation 18:2, 4) Have you done this? If
so, you are to be commended. But more is involved
than just separating yourself or resigning from a false
religion. Afterward, you must ask yourself, ‘Do any
traces of false worship remain in me?’ Consider some
examples.
3

IMAGES AND ANCESTOR WORSHIP
Some have had images or shrines in their home

for years. Is that true of you? If so, you might feel
that it is strange or wrong to pray to God without
such a visible aid. You may even feel attached to some
of these items. But God is the one who says how he
should be worshipped, and the Bible teaches that he
does not want us to use images. (Read Exodus 20:4, 5;
Psalm 115:4-8; Isaiah 42:8; 1 John 5:21) So you can
take a stand for true worship by destroying any items
you own that are connected with false worship. By all
means, come to view them as Jehovah does—as something “detestable.”—Deuteronomy 27:15.
3. (a) What does the Bible say about the use of images, and why might
God’s view be di?cult for some to accept? (b) What should you do with
any items you own that are connected with false worship?
198

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Ancestor worship also is common in many false
religions. Before learning Bible truth, some believed
that the dead are conscious in an invisible realm and
that they can help or harm the living. Perhaps you
used to go to great lengths to appease your dead ancestors. But as you learned in Chapter 6 of this
book, the dead have no conscious existence anywhere. Thus, attempts to communicate with them are
of no use. Any messages that seem to come from a
dead loved one really originate with the demons.
Therefore, Jehovah forbade the Israelites to try to
talk with the dead or to participate in any other form
of spiritism.—Read Deuteronomy 18:10-12.
5 If the use of images or the practice of ancestor
worship was part of your former way of worship,
what can you do? Read and ponder over Bible passages that show you how God views these things.
Pray to Jehovah daily about your desire to take a
stand for true worship, and ask him to help you to
think as he does.—Isaiah 55:9.
4

4. (a) How do we know that ancestor worship is futile? (b) Why did
Jehovah forbid his people to engage in any form of spiritism?
5. What can you do if the use of images or the practice of ancestor
worship was in your religious past?
Take Your Stand for True Worship

199

CHRISTMAS—NOT CELEBRATED
BY EARLY CHRISTIANS
6 A person’s worship could be contaminated by
false religion as it relates to popular holidays. Consider Christmas, for example. Christmas supposedly
commemorates the birth of Jesus Christ, and nearly
every religion that claims to be Christian celebrates
it. Yet, there is no evidence that the ?rst-century disciples of Jesus observed such a holiday. The book Sacred Origins of Profound Things states: “For two centuries after Christ’s birth, no one knew, and few
people cared, exactly when he was born.”

Even if Jesus’ disciples had known the exact date
of his birth, they would not have celebrated it. Why?
Because, as The World Book Encyclopedia says, the early Christians “considered the celebration of anyone’s
birth to be a pagan custom.” The only birthday observances mentioned in the Bible are those of two rulers who did not worship Jehovah. (Genesis 40:20;
Mark 6:21) Birthday celebrations were also held in
honor of pagan deities. For example, on May 24
7

6, 7. (a) Christmas supposedly commemorates what, and did Jesus’
?rst-century followers observe it? (b) What were birthday celebrations
associated with during the time of Jesus’ early disciples?
200

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

the Romans celebrated the birthday of the goddess
Diana. On the following day, they observed the birthday of their sun god, Apollo. Hence, birthday celebrations were associated with paganism, not with Christianity.
8 There is another reason why ?rst-century Christians would not have celebrated Jesus’ birthday.
His disciples likely knew that birthday celebrations
were connected with superstition. For instance, many
Greeks and Romans of ancient times believed that a
spirit attended the birth of each human and protected that one throughout life. “This spirit had a mystic
relation with the god on whose birthday the individual was born,” says the book The Lore of Birthdays. Jehovah certainly would not be pleased with any observance that would link Jesus with superstition. (Isaiah
65:11, 12) So how did Christmas come to be celebrated by many people?
9

THE ORIGIN OF CHRISTMAS
It was not until several hundred years after

8. Explain the connection between birthday celebrations and superstition.
9. How did December 25 come to be regarded as the day to celebrate
Jesus’ birth?
Take Your Stand for True Worship

201

Jesus lived on the earth that people began to commemorate his birth on December 25. But that was not
the date of Jesus’ birth, for it evidently took place in
October.1 So why was December 25 chosen? Some
who later claimed to be Christian likely “wished the
date to coincide with the pagan Roman festival marking the ‘birthday of the unconquered sun.’ ” (The
New Encyclopædia Britannica) In winter, when the sun
seemed weakest, pagans held ceremonies to get this
source of warmth and light to come back from its distant travels. December 25 was thought to be the day
that the sun began its return. In an e?ort to convert
pagans, religious leaders adopted this festival and
tried to make it seem “Christian.”2
10 The pagan roots of Christmas have long been
recognized. Because of its unscriptural origin,
Christmas was banned in England and in some of the
American colonies during the 17th century. Anyone
who even stayed home from work on Christmas day
1 See the Appendix, pages 283-285.
2 The Saturnalia also played a part in the choice of December 25.
This festival honoring the Roman god of agriculture took place on
December 17-24. Feasting, merrymaking, and gift-giving took place
during the Saturnalia.

10. In times past, why did some people not celebrate Christmas?
202

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

had to pay a penalty. Soon, though, the old customs
were back, and some new ones were added. Christmas
once again became a big holiday, and that is what it
still is in many lands. Because of the connections that
Christmas has with false religion, however, those who
want to please God do not celebrate it or any other
holiday that has its roots in pagan worship.1
D O ORIGINS REALLY MATTER?
11 Some agree that such holidays as Christmas have
pagan origins but still feel that it is not wrong to celebrate them. After all, most people are not thinking
about false worship when they observe holidays. These
occasions also give families opportunities to draw
close together. Is this how you feel? If so, likely it is love
of family, not love of false religion, that makes taking
a stand for true worship seem di?cult. Be assured that
Jehovah, the one who originated the family, wants you
to have a good relationship with your relatives. (Ephesians 3:14, 15) But you can strengthen such bonds in
ways that God approves. Regarding the matter that
1 For a discussion of how true Christians view other popular holidays, see the Appendix, pages 285-287.

11. Why do some people celebrate holidays, but what should be our
chief concern?
Take Your Stand for True Worship

203

should be our chief concern, the apostle Paul wrote:
“Keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the
Lord.”—Ephesians 5:10.
12 Maybe you feel that the origins of holidays have
little to do with how they are celebrated today. Do
origins really matter? Yes! To illustrate: Suppose you
saw a piece of candy lying in the gutter. Would you
pick up that candy and eat it? Of course not! That
candy is unclean. Like that candy, holidays may seem
sweet, but they have been picked up from unclean
places. To take a stand for true worship, we need to
have a viewpoint like that of the prophet Isaiah,
who told true worshippers: “Touch nothing unclean!”
—Isaiah 52:11.
DIS CERNMENT IN DEALING WITH OTHERS
13 Challenges may arise when you choose not to participate in holidays. For example, fellow employees
may wonder why you do not engage in certain holiday activities where you work. What if you are o?ered
a Christmas gift? Would it be wrong to accept it?
12. Illustrate why we should avoid customs and celebrations that have
bad origins.
13. What challenges may arise when you do not participate in holidays?
204

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

What if your marriage mate does not share your beliefs? How can you make sure that your children do
not feel deprived because of not celebrating holidays?
14 Good judgment is needed to discern how to handle each situation. If a holiday greeting is casually extended, you could simply thank the well-wisher. But
suppose you are dealing with someone you see or
work with regularly. In that case, you might choose
to say more. In all cases, be tactful. The Bible advises: “Let your words always be gracious, seasoned with
salt, so that you will know how you should answer
each person.” (Colossians 4:6) Be careful not to show
disrespect for others. Instead, tactfully explain your
position. Make clear that you are not against giftgiving and gatherings but prefer to participate in
these activities at a di?erent time.
15 What if someone wants to give you a gift? Much
depends on the circumstances. The giver might say:
“I know that you do not celebrate the holiday. Still, I
want you to have this.” You may decide that accepting the gift under those circumstances is not the same
as taking part in the holiday. Of course, if the giver
14, 15. What could you do if a holiday greeting is extended to you or
if someone wants to give you a gift?
Take Your Stand for True Worship

205

is not familiar with your beliefs, you could mention
that you do not observe the holiday. This would help
to explain why you accept a gift but do not give one
on that occasion. On the other hand, it would be wise
not to accept a gift if it is given with the clear intention of showing that you do not stick to your beliefs
or that you would compromise for the sake of material gain.
WHAT AB OUT FAMILY MEMBERS?
16 What if family members do not share your beliefs? Again, be tactful. There is no need to make an
issue of every custom or celebration that your relatives choose to observe. Instead, respect their right
to their views, just as you want them to respect your
right to yours. (Read Matthew 7:12.) Avoid any actions
that would make you a participant in the holiday.
Still, be reasonable when it comes to matters that do
not amount to actual celebration. Of course, you
should always act in a way that will leave you with a
good conscience.—Read 1 Timothy 1:18, 19.
17 What can you do so that your children do not feel
16. How can you be tactful when handling matters related to holidays?
17. How can you help your children not to feel deprived because they
see that others are celebrating holidays?
206

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

deprived because of not celebrating unscriptural holidays? Much depends on what you do at other times
of the year. Some parents set aside times to give presents to their children. One of the best gifts you can
give your children is your time and loving attention.
18

PRACTICE TRUE WORSHIP
To please God, you must reject false worship and

take a stand for true worship. What does this include?
The Bible states: “Let us consider one another so as
to incite to love and ?ne works, not forsaking our
meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see
the day drawing near.” (Hebrews 10:24, 25) Christian
meetings are happy occasions for you to worship God
in the way that he approves. (Psalm 22:22; 122:1) At
such meetings, there is “an interchange of encouragement” among faithful Christians.—Romans 1:12.
19

Another way that you can take a stand for true

worship is to speak to others about the things you
18. How can attending Christian meetings help you to take a stand for
true worship?
19. Why is it important that you speak to others about the things you
have learned from the Bible?
Take Your Stand for True Worship

207

have learned from studying the Bible with Jehovah’s
Witnesses. Many people truly are sighing and groaning over the wickedness that is taking place in the
world today. Perhaps you know some people who feel
that way. Why not speak to them about your Biblebased hope for the future? As you associate with true
Christians and speak to others about the marvelous
Bible truths you have learned, you will find that any
desire for the customs of false worship that may have
remained in your heart will gradually disappear. Be
assured that you will be very happy and will receive
many blessings if you take your stand for true worship.—Malachi 3:10.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Neither images nor ancestor worship have any
place in true worship.—Exodus 20:4, 5; Deuteronomy 18:10-12.
? It is wrong to take part in celebrations that
have pagan origins.—Ephesians 5:10.
? True Christians should be tactful when they explain their beliefs to others.
—Colossians 4:6.
208

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Draw Close to God in Prayer
Why should we pray to God?
What must we do to be heard by God?
How does God answer our prayers?
COMPARED with the vast universe, the earth is
very small. In fact, to Jehovah, “the Maker of heaven and earth,” the nations of mankind are like a
tiny drop of water from a bucket. (Psalm 115:15;
Isaiah 40:15) Yet, the Bible says: “Jehovah is near to
all those calling on him, to all who call on him in
truth. He satis?es the desire of those who fear him;
he hears their cry for help.” (Psalm 145:18, 19) Just
think of what that means! The almighty Creator is
near to us and will hear us if we “call on him in
truth.” What a privilege we have to approach God
in prayer!
2

If we want Jehovah to listen to our prayers,

1, 2. Why should we view prayer as a great privilege, and why do we
need to know what the Bible teaches about it?
Draw Close to God in Prayer

209

however, we must pray to him in the way that he
approves. How can we do this unless we understand
what the Bible teaches about prayer? It is vital for
us to know what the Scriptures say on this subject,
for prayer helps us to draw closer to Jehovah.
3

WHY PRAY TO JEHOVAH?
One important reason why we should pray to Je-

hovah is that he invites us to do so. His Word encourages us: “Do not be anxious over anything, but
in everything by prayer and supplication along with
thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to
God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental
powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 4:
6, 7) Surely we would not want to ignore such a
kind provision made for us by the Supreme Ruler
of the universe!
Another reason to pray is that regularly praying to Jehovah is a way to strengthen our relationship with him. True friends do not commu4

3. What is one important reason why we should pray to Jehovah?
4. How does regular prayer to Jehovah strengthen our relationship
with him?
210

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

nicate only when they need something. Rather,
good friends are interested in each other, and their
friendship becomes stronger as they freely express
their thoughts, concerns, and feelings. In some respects, the situation is similar when it comes to our
relationship with Jehovah God. With the help of
this book, you have learned much about what the
Bible teaches regarding Jehovah, his personality,
and his purposes. You have come to know him as a
real Person. Prayer gives you the opportunity to express your thoughts and innermost feelings to your
heavenly Father. As you do, you draw closer to Jehovah.—James 4:8.
WHAT REQUIREMENTS MUST WE MEET?
5 Does Jehovah listen to all prayers? Consider
what he told rebellious Israelites in the days of the
prophet Isaiah: “Although you o?er many prayers, I
am not listening; your hands are ?lled with blood.”
(Isaiah 1:15) So certain actions can cause God not
to listen to our prayers. For our prayers to be favorably heard by God, therefore, we must meet some
basic requirements.
5. What shows that Jehovah does not listen to all prayers?
Draw Close to God in Prayer

211

A primary requirement is that we exercise faith.
(Read Mark 11:24.) The apostle Paul wrote: “Without
faith it is impossible to please God well, for whoever
approaches God must believe that he is and that he
becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking
him.” (Hebrews 11:6) Having true faith is more than
merely knowing that God exists and that he hears
and answers prayers. Faith is proved by our actions.
We must give clear evidence that we have faith by
the way we live every day.—James 2:26.
6

Jehovah also requires that those who approach
him in prayer do so with humility and sincerity. Do
we not have reason to be humble when speaking to
Jehovah? When people have the opportunity to
speak to a king or a president, they usually do so respectfully, acknowledging the ruler’s high position.
How much more so should we be respectful when
approaching Jehovah! (Psalm 138:6) After all, he is
“God Almighty.” (Genesis 17:1) When we pray to
7

6. In order for God to listen to our prayers, what is a primary requirement, and how can we meet it?
7. (a) Why should we be respectful when speaking to Jehovah in
prayer? (b) When praying to God, how can we show humility and sincerity?
212

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

God, the manner in which we approach him should
show that we humbly recognize our position before
him. Such humility will also move us to pray from
our heart in sincerity, avoiding routine, repetitive
prayers.—Matthew 6:7, 8.
8 Another requirement for being heard by God is
that we act in harmony with our prayers. Jehovah
expects us to do all that is within our power to
work at what we pray for. For example, if we pray,
“Give us today our bread for this day,” we must
work hard at whatever available job we are able to
perform. (Matthew 6:11; 2 Thessalonians 3:10) If we
pray for help in overcoming a ?eshly weakness, we
must be careful to avoid circumstances and situations that could lead us into temptation. (Colossians 3:5) In addition to these basic requirements,
there are questions about prayer that we need to
have answered.
ANSWERING S OME QUESTIONS
AB OUT PRAYER
9 To whom should we pray? Jesus taught his followers to pray to “our Father in the heavens.”
8. How can we act in harmony with what we pray for?
9. To whom should we pray, and through whom?
Draw Close to God in Prayer

213

(Matthew 6:9) Our prayers, then, must be directed only to Jehovah God. However, Jehovah requires that we acknowledge the position of his
only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ. As we learned in
Chapter 5, Jesus was sent to the earth to serve as a
ransom to redeem us from sin and death. (John 3:
16; Romans 5:12) He is the appointed High Priest
and Judge. (John 5:22; Hebrews 6:20) Hence, the
Scriptures direct us to o?er our prayers through Jesus. He himself said: “I am the way and the truth
and the life. No one comes to the Father except
through me.” (John 14:6) For our prayers to be
heard, we must pray only to Jehovah through his
Son.
Must we assume a special position or posture when
praying? No. Jehovah does not require any speci?c
position, either of the hands or of the whole body.
The Bible teaches that it is acceptable to pray in
a wide variety of positions. These include sitting,
bowing, kneeling, and standing. (1 Chronicles 17:16;
Nehemiah 8:6; Daniel 6:10; Mark 11:25) What is
truly important is, not some special posture that
10

10. Why is no speci?c position or posture required when we pray?
214

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

can be seen by others, but the right heart attitude.
In fact, during our daily activities or when we are
faced with an emergency, we may o?er a silent
prayer wherever we are. Jehovah hears such prayers,
even though they may go completely unnoticed by
those around us.—Nehemiah 2:1-6.
What may we pray for? The Bible explains: “No
matter what we ask according to his will, [Jehovah]
hears us.” (1 John 5:14) So we may pray for anything that is in harmony with God’s will. Is it his
will that we pray about personal concerns? By all
means! Praying to Jehovah can be much like talking
to a close friend. We may speak openly, ‘pouring
out our heart’ to God. (Psalm 62:8) It is proper for
us to ask for holy spirit, for it will help us to do
what is right. (Luke 11:13) We can also ask for guidance in making wise decisions and for strength
in coping with di?culties. (James 1:5) When we
sin, we should ask for forgiveness on the basis of
Christ’s sacri?ce. (Ephesians 1:3, 7) Of course, personal matters should not be the only subjects of
11

11. What are some personal concerns that are proper subjects of
prayer?
Draw Close to God in Prayer

215

our prayers. We should broaden out our prayers to
include other people—family members as well as
fellow worshippers.—Acts 12:5; Colossians 4:12.
12

Matters relating to Jehovah God should be giv-

en ?rst importance in our prayers. We certainly
have reason to express heartfelt praise and thanks
to him for all his goodness. (1 Chronicles 29:10-13)
Jesus gave the model prayer, recorded at Matthew 6:
9-13, in which he taught us to pray that God’s name
be sancti?ed, that is, treated as sacred, or holy.
(Read.) That God’s Kingdom come and that his will
be done on earth as it is in heaven are mentioned
next. Only after covering these important matters
relating to Jehovah did Jesus give attention to personal concerns. When we likewise give God the
most important place in our prayers, we show that
we are interested in more than just our own welfare.
13

How long should our prayers be? The Bible does

12. How may we give matters concerning our heavenly Father ?rst importance in our prayers?
13. What do the Scriptures indicate about the length of acceptable
prayers?
216

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

not place any limit on how long private or public
prayers should be. They may range from a brief
prayer before a meal to a long private prayer in
which we pour out our heart to Jehovah. (1 Samuel
1:12, 15) However, Jesus condemned self-righteous
individuals who made long, showy prayers before
others. (Luke 20:46, 47) Such prayers do not impress
Jehovah. What is important is that we pray from
our heart. Hence, the length of acceptable prayers
may vary according to needs and circumstances.
How often should we pray? The Bible encourages
us to “pray continually,” to “persevere in prayer,”
and to “pray constantly.” (Matthew 26:41; Romans
12:12; 1 Thessalonians 5:17) Of course, these statements do not mean that we must be praying to Jehovah every moment of the day. Rather, the Bible
is urging us to pray regularly, continually thanking
Jehovah for his goodness to us and looking to him
for guidance, comfort, and strength. Is it not comforting to know that Jehovah puts no limit on how
long or how often we can talk to him in prayer? If
14

14. What does the Bible mean when it encourages us to “pray continually,” and what is comforting about this?
Draw Close to God in Prayer

217

we truly appreciate the privilege of prayer, we will
?nd many opportunities to pray to our heavenly Father.
Why should we say “Amen” at the end of a prayer?
The word “amen” means “surely,” or “so be it.”
Scriptural examples show that it is appropriate to
say “Amen” at the close of personal and public
prayers. (1 Chronicles 16:36; Psalm 41:13) By saying
“Amen” at the end of our own prayer, we a?rm that
our expressions were made with sincerity. When we
say “Amen”—either silently or out loud—at the end
of someone’s public prayer, we indicate that we are
in agreement with the thoughts that were expressed.
—1 Corinthians 14:16.
15

16

HOW G OD ANSWERS OUR PRAYERS
Does Jehovah really answer prayers? Yes, in-

deed! We have a firm basis to be con?dent that the
“Hearer of prayer” answers sincere prayers o?ered
by millions of humans. (Psalm 65:2) Jehovah’s answer to our prayers may come in a variety of ways.
15. Why should we say “Amen” at the end of personal and public
prayers?
16. What con?dence can we have regarding prayer?
218

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jehovah uses his angels and his earthly servants
to answer prayers. (Hebrews 1:13, 14) There have
been many experiences of individuals who prayed
to God for help to understand the Bible and were
soon thereafter contacted by one of Jehovah’s servants. Such experiences give evidence of angelic direction of the Kingdom-preaching work. (Revelation 14:6) To answer our prayers o?ered in a time
of real need, Jehovah may motivate a Christian to
come to our aid.—Proverbs 12:25; James 2:16.
17

Jehovah God also uses his holy spirit and his
Word, the Bible, to answer the prayers of his servants. He may answer our prayers for help to cope
with trials by giving us guidance and strength by
means of his holy spirit. (2 Corinthians 4:7) Often
the answer to our prayers for direction comes from
the Bible, where Jehovah gives us help in making
wise decisions. Helpful scriptures may be found
during our personal Bible study and as we read
Christian publications, such as this book. Scriptural
18

17. Why can it be said that God uses his angels and his earthly servants to answer our prayers?
18. How does Jehovah use his holy spirit and his Word to answer the
prayers of his servants?
Draw Close to God in Prayer

219

points that we need to consider may be brought to
our attention by what is said at a Christian meeting or through the comments of a concerned elder
in the congregation.—Galatians 6:1.
If Jehovah seems to delay in answering our
prayers, this is never because he is not able to answer them. Rather, we must remember that Jehovah answers prayers according to his will and in his
due time. He knows our needs and how to care for
them far better than we do. Often he allows us to
‘keep on asking, seeking, and knocking.’ (Luke 11:
5-10) Such perseverance shows God that our desire
is very deep and that our faith is genuine. Furthermore, Jehovah may answer our prayers in a way that
is not obvious to us. For example, he may answer
our prayer regarding a particular trial, not by removing the di?culty, but by giving us the strength
to endure it.—Read Philippians 4:13.
19

How thankful we can be that the Creator of this
vast universe is close to all who call on him prop20

19. What should we keep in mind if our prayers sometimes seem to go
unanswered?
20. Why should we take full advantage of the precious privilege of
prayer?
220

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

erly in prayer! (Read Psalm 145:18.) May we take full
advantage of the precious privilege of prayer. If we
do, we will have the joyous prospect of drawing ever
closer to Jehovah, the Hearer of prayer.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Regularly praying to Jehovah helps us to draw
closer to him.—James 4:8.
? For our prayers to be heard by God, we must
pray in faith and with humility and sincerity.
—Mark 11:24.
? We must pray only to Jehovah through his
Son.—Matthew 6:9; John 14:6.
? Jehovah, the “Hearer of prayer,” uses his angels, his earthly servants, his holy spirit, and
his Word to answer prayers.—Psalm 65:2.

Draw Close to God in Prayer

221

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Baptism and Your Relationship With God
How is Christian baptism performed?
What steps do you need to take to qualify
for baptism?
How does a person make a dedication to God?
What is the special reason for
getting baptized?
“LOOK! Here is water; what prevents me from getting baptized?” That question was asked by an Ethiopian court o?cial in the ?rst century. A Christian
named Philip had proved to him that Jesus was the
promised Messiah. Touched to the heart by what
he had learned from the Scriptures, the Ethiopian
man took action. He showed that he wanted to be
baptized!—Acts 8:26-36.
2

If you have carefully studied the earlier chap-

ters of this book with one of Jehovah’s Witness1. Why did an Ethiopian court o?cial request baptism?
2. Why should you think seriously about baptism?
222

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

es, you may feel ready to ask, ‘What prevents me
from getting baptized?’ By now you have learned
about the Bible’s promise of everlasting life in Paradise. (Luke 23:43; Revelation 21:3, 4) You have also
learned about the true condition of the dead and
the resurrection hope. (Ecclesiastes 9:5; John 5:28,
29) You have probably been associating with Jehovah’s Witnesses at their congregation meetings
and have seen for yourself how they practice the
true religion. (John 13:35) Most important, you
have likely begun to develop a personal relationship with Jehovah God.
3

How can you show that you want to serve God?

Jesus told his followers: “Go . . . and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them.”
(Matthew 28:19) Jesus himself set the example by
being baptized in water. He was not sprinkled with
water, and he did not just have some water poured
over his head. (Matthew 3:16) The word “baptize”
comes from a Greek term meaning “dip under
3. (a) What command did Jesus give his followers? (b) How is water
baptism performed?
Baptism and Your Relationship With God

223

water.” Christian baptism therefore means being
fully dipped, or immersed, in water.
Water baptism is a requirement for all who want
to have a relationship with Jehovah God. Bap4

tism publicly indicates your desire to serve God. It
shows that you are delighted to do Jehovah’s will.
(Psalm 40:7, 8) To qualify for baptism, however,
you must take de?nite steps.
5

KNOWLED GE AND FAITH NEEDED
You have already begun to take the ?rst step.

How? By coming to know Jehovah God and Jesus
Christ, perhaps by means of a systematic study of
the Bible. (Read John 17:3.) But there is more to
learn. Christians want to be “?lled with the accurate knowledge of [God’s] will.” (Colossians 1:9)
Attending the congregation meetings of Jehovah’s
Witnesses is a big help in this regard. It is important to attend such meetings. (Hebrews 10:24, 25)
Regular meeting attendance will help you come to
know God.
4. What does water baptism indicate?
5. (a) What is the ?rst step in qualifying for baptism? (b) Why are
Christian meetings important?
224

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Of course, you do not need to know everything in the Bible in order to qualify for baptism.
6

The Ethiopian court o?cial had some knowledge,
but he needed help to understand certain parts of
the Scriptures. (Acts 8:30, 31) Likewise, you still
have much to learn. In fact, you will never stop
learning about God. (Ecclesiastes 3:11) Before you
can get baptized, however, you need to know and
accept at least the basic Bible teachings. (Hebrews
5:12) Such teachings include the truth about the
condition of the dead and the importance of God’s
name and his Kingdom.
Knowledge alone is not enough, though, for
“without faith it is impossible to please God well.”
(Hebrews 11:6) The Bible tells us that when some
people in the ancient city of Corinth heard the
7

Christian message, they “began to believe and be
baptized.” (Acts 18:8) In a similar way, a study of
the Bible should ?ll you with faith that it is the inspired Word of God. Bible study should help you
6. How much Bible knowledge must you have in order to qualify for
baptism?
7. What e?ect should a study of the Bible have on you?
Baptism and Your Relationship With God

225

to have faith in God’s promises and in the saving
power of Jesus’ sacri?ce.—Joshua 23:14; Acts 4:12;
2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
8

SHARING BIBLE TRUTH WITH OTHERS
As faith grows in your heart, you will ?nd it

hard to keep what you have learned to yourself.
(Jeremiah 20:9) You will be strongly motivated to
speak to others about God and his purposes.—Read
2 Corinthians 4:13.
9

You might begin to share Bible truth with oth-

ers by tactfully speaking about it to your relatives,
friends, neighbors, and workmates. In time, you
will want to share in the organized preaching work
of Jehovah’s Witnesses. At that point, feel free to
talk things over with the Witness who is teaching
you the Bible. If it appears that you qualify to participate in the witnessing work, arrangements will
be made for you and your teacher to meet with two
of the congregation elders.
8. What will move you to share with others what you have learned?
9, 10. (a) With whom might you begin sharing Bible truth? (b) What
should you do if you want to share in the organized preaching work of
Jehovah’s Witnesses?
226

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

This will enable you to get better acquainted
with some Christian elders, who shepherd the ?ock
of God. (Acts 20:28; 1 Peter 5:2, 3) If these elders
see that you understand and believe basic Bible
teachings, are living in harmony with God’s principles, and truly want to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, they will let you know that you qualify to
share in the ?eld ministry as an unbaptized publisher of the good news.
11 On the other hand, you may need to make some
changes in your life-style and habits in order to
qualify for the ?eld ministry. This may include
stopping some practices that have been kept secret
from others. Hence, before you ask about becoming
an unbaptized publisher, you need to be free of serious sins, such as sexual immorality, drunkenness,
and drug abuse.—Read 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; Galatians 5:19-21.
10

REPENTANCE AND CONVERSION
12 Some other steps must be taken before you
qualify for baptism. The apostle Peter said: “Repent
11. What changes might some have to make before they qualify for the
?eld ministry?
12. Why is repentance necessary?
Baptism and Your Relationship With God

227

. . . and turn around so as to get your sins blotted
out.” (Acts 3:19) To repent is to feel sincere regret
over something you have done. Repentance is clearly ?tting if a person has lived an immoral life, but
it is also necessary even if one has lived a relatively clean life morally. Why? Because all humans are
sinners and need God’s forgiveness. (Romans 3:23;
5:12) Before studying the Bible, you did not know
what God’s will was. So how could you have lived
in full harmony with his will? Therefore, repentance is necessary.
Repentance must be followed by conversion, or
‘turning around.’ You must do more than feel regret. You need to reject your former way of life and
be ?rmly determined that you will do what is right
from now on. Repentance and conversion are steps
that you must take before getting baptized.
13

14

MAKING A PERS ONAL DEDICATION
There is another important step to take before

getting baptized. You must dedicate yourself to Jehovah God.
13. What is conversion?
14. What important step must you take before getting baptized?
228

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

When you dedicate yourself to Jehovah God in
earnest prayer, you promise to give him your exclusive devotion forever. (Deuteronomy 6:15) Why,
though, would someone want to do that? Well, suppose a man has begun to court a woman. The more
he learns about her and sees that she has ?ne qualities, the more he ?nds himself drawn to her. In
time, it is natural that he would ask her to marry
him. True, getting married will mean taking on additional responsibilities. But love will move him to
take that important step.
15

When you come to know and love Jehovah, you
are moved to serve him without holding anything
back or setting any limits in worshipping him. Anyone who wants to follow God’s Son, Jesus Christ,
has to “disown himself.” (Mark 8:34) We disown
ourselves by making sure that personal desires and
goals do not stand in the way of our complete obedience to God. Before you can get baptized, then,
doing Jehovah God’s will must be your main purpose in life.—Read 1 Peter 4:2.
16

15, 16. What does it mean to dedicate yourself to God, and what
moves a person to do this?
Baptism and Your Relationship With God

229

17

OVERCOMING FEAR OF FAILURE
Some hold back from making a dedication to

Jehovah because they are somewhat afraid of taking such a serious step. They may fear being accountable to God as a dedicated Christian. Being
afraid that they may fail and disappoint Jehovah,
they think that it is best not to make a dedication
to him.
18

As you learn to love Jehovah, you will be

moved to make a dedication to him and to do your
best to live up to it. (Ecclesiastes 5:4) After making a dedication, surely you will want to “walk worthily of Jehovah in order to please him fully.” (Colossians 1:10) Because of your love for God, you
will not think it is too hard to do his will. No doubt
you will agree with the apostle John, who wrote:
“This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome.”—1 John 5:3.
19

You do not have to be perfect to make a dedi-

17. Why might some hold back from making a dedication to God?
18. What can move you to make a dedication to Jehovah?
19. Why do you not need to fear making a dedication to God?
230

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

cation to God. Jehovah knows your limitations and
never expects you to do more than you are able to
do. (Psalm 103:14) He wants you to succeed and
will support and help you. (Read Isaiah 41:10.) You
can be sure that if you trust in Jehovah with all
your heart, “he will make your paths straight.”
—Proverbs 3:5, 6.

20

SYMB OLIZING YOUR DEDICATION
BY GETTING BAPTIZED
Thinking about the things we have just dis-

cussed may help you to make a personal dedication
to Jehovah in prayer. Everyone who really loves
God must also make “public declaration for salvation.” (Romans 10:10) How do you go about doing
that?
Let the coordinator of the body of elders of
your congregation know that you want to get baptized. He will arrange for some elders to review
with you a number of questions that cover the
Bible’s basic teachings. If these elders agree that
21

you qualify, they will tell you that you can get
20. Why can dedication to Jehovah not remain a private matter?
21, 22. How can you make “public declaration” of your faith?
Baptism and Your Relationship With God

231

baptized at the next opportunity.1 A talk reviewing
the meaning of baptism is usually given on such occasions. The speaker then invites all baptism candidates to answer two simple questions as one way
to make a verbal “public declaration” of their faith.
22 It is the baptism itself that publicly identi?es
you as a person who has made a dedication to God
and is now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Baptism
candidates are fully immersed in water to show
publicly that they have made a dedication to Jehovah.
THE MEANING OF YOUR BAPTISM
23 Jesus said that his disciples would be baptized
“in the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the holy spirit.” (Matthew 28:19) This means that
a baptism candidate recognizes the authority of Jehovah God and of Jesus Christ. (Psalm 83:18; Matthew 28:18) He also recognizes the function and
activity of God’s holy spirit, or active force.—Galatians 5:22, 23; 2 Peter 1:21.
1 Baptisms are a regular feature of annual assemblies and conventions held by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

23. What does it mean to be baptized “in the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the holy spirit”?
232

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

However, baptism is not a mere bath. It is a
symbol of something very important. Going beneath the water symbolizes that you have died to
your former life course. Being raised up out of the
water indicates that you are now alive to do the
will of God. Remember, too, that you have made a
dedication to Jehovah God himself, not to a work,
a cause, other humans, or an organization. Your
dedication and baptism are the beginning of a very
close friendship with God—an intimate relationship with him.—Psalm 25:14.
24

Baptism does not guarantee salvation. The
apostle Paul wrote: “Keep working out your own
salvation with fear and trembling.” (Philippians 2:
12) Baptism is only a beginning. The question is,
How can you remain in God’s love? Our ?nal chapter will provide the answer.
25

24, 25. (a) What does baptism symbolize? (b) What question needs
to be answered?

Baptism and Your Relationship With God

233

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? Christian baptism involves complete immersion in water, not just sprinkling.
—Matthew 3:16.
? Steps leading to baptism begin with coming to
know Jehovah and Jesus and showing faith followed by repentance, conversion, and the dedicating of oneself to God.—John 17:3;
Acts 3:19; 18:8.
? To make a dedication to Jehovah, you must
disown yourself, even as people disowned
themselves to follow Jesus.—Mark 8:34.
? Baptism symbolizes dying to one’s former way
of life and becoming alive to do God’s will.
—1 Peter 4:2.

234

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Remain in God’s Love
What does it mean to love God?
How can we remain in God’s love?
How will Jehovah reward those who
remain in his love?
PICTURE yourself walking along a road on a stormy
day. The sky becomes darker. Lightning starts to ?ash,
thunder booms, then rain falls in torrents. You hurry
along, desperately looking for a refuge. There, by the
roadside, you see a shelter. It is sturdy, dry, and inviting. How you value that safe place!
2 We are living in stormy times. World conditions are
going from bad to worse. But there is a secure shelter,
a refuge that can keep us safe from permanent harm.
What is it? Note what the Bible teaches: “I will say to
Jehovah: ‘You are my refuge and my stronghold, my
God, in whom I trust.’ ”—Psalm 91:2.
3 Imagine that! Jehovah, the Creator and Sovereign
of the universe, can be our protective refuge. He can
1, 2. Where can we ?nd a safe refuge today?
3. How can we make Jehovah our refuge?
Remain in God’s Love

235

keep us safe, for he is far more powerful than anyone
or anything that may come against us. Even if we are
harmed, Jehovah can undo all the bad e?ects. How can
we make Jehovah our refuge? We need to trust in him.
Furthermore, God’s Word urges us: “Keep yourselves
in God’s love.” (Jude 21) Yes, we need to remain in
God’s love, maintaining a loving bond with our heavenly Father. Then we may rest assured that he is our
refuge. But how can we form such a bond?
RECO GNIZE AND RESP OND TO G OD’S LOVE
4 To remain in God’s love, we need to appreciate how
Jehovah has shown his love for us. Think of some of
the Bible teachings you have learned with the aid of
this book. As the Creator, Jehovah has given us the
earth as our delightful home. He has ?lled it with
abundant food and water, natural resources, fascinating animal life, and beautiful scenery. As the Author
of the Bible, God has revealed his name and his qualities to us. Moreover, his Word reveals that he sent his
own beloved Son to the earth, allowing Jesus to su?er
and die for us. (John 3:16) And what does that gift
mean for us? It gives us hope for a wonderful future.
5 Our hope for the future also depends on something
4, 5. What are some of the ways that Jehovah has expressed love
for us?
236

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

else that God has done. Jehovah has established a
heavenly government, the Messianic Kingdom. It will
soon bring an end to all su?ering and will make the
earth a paradise. Just think! We can live there in peace
and happiness forever. (Psalm 37:29) Meanwhile, God
has given us guidance on how to live in the best
way possible right now. He has also given us the gift
of prayer, an open line of communication with him.
These are just a few of the ways that Jehovah has
shown love for mankind in general and for you as an
individual.
6 The vital question for you to consider is this: How
will I respond to Jehovah’s love? Many will say, “Well,
I need to love Jehovah in return.” Is that how you feel?
Jesus said that this command is the greatest of all:
“You must love Jehovah your God with your whole
heart and with your whole soul and with your whole
mind.” (Matthew 22:37) You certainly have many reasons to love Jehovah God. But is feeling that you have
such love all that is involved in loving Jehovah with
your whole heart, soul, and mind?
7 As described in the Bible, love for God is much
6. How might you respond to the love that Jehovah has shown you?
7. Is there more to loving God than simply experiencing a feeling? Explain.
Remain in God’s Love

237

more than a feeling. In fact, although the feeling of
love for Jehovah is essential, that feeling is just the beginning of real love for him. An apple seed is essential
to the development of a fruit-bearing apple tree. If you
wanted an apple, however, would you be content if
someone merely handed you an apple seed? Hardly!
Similarly, a feeling of love for Jehovah God is only a
start. The Bible teaches: “This is what the love of God
means, that we observe his commandments; and yet
his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John 5:3)
To be genuine, love for God must bear ?ne fruit. It
must be expressed in actions.—Read Matthew 7:16-20.
8 We show our love for God when we observe his
commandments and apply his principles. It is not too
hard to do so. Far from being burdensome, Jehovah’s
laws are designed to help us live a good, happy, satisfying life. (Isaiah 48:17, 18) By living in harmony with
Jehovah’s guidance, we show our heavenly Father that
we truly appreciate all that he has done for us. Sadly,
too few in today’s world show such appreciation. We
do not want to be unappreciative, like some people
who lived when Jesus was on earth. Jesus healed ten
lepers, but only one turned back to thank him. (Luke
8, 9. How can we express our love and appreciation for God?
238

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

17:12-17) Surely we would want to be like the grateful
one, not the ungrateful nine!
9 What, then, are Jehovah’s commandments that we
need to observe? We have discussed a number of them
in this book, but let us review a few. Observing God’s
commandments will help us to remain in God’s love.
DRAW EVER CLO SER TO JEHOVAH
10 Learning about Jehovah is a vital step in drawing
closer to him. It is a process that should never stop. If
you were outside on a very cold night warming yourself by a ?re, would you let the ?ames dwindle and then
die out? No. You would keep adding fuel to keep the
?re burning bright and hot. Your very life might be at
stake! As wood fuels a ?re, so “the knowledge of God”
keeps our love for Jehovah strong.—Proverbs 2:1-5.
11 Jesus wanted his followers to keep their love for
Jehovah and for His precious Word of truth alive and
burning brightly. After his resurrection, Jesus taught
two of his disciples about some of the prophecies in
the Hebrew Scriptures that were ful?lled in him. What
was the e?ect? They later said: “Were not our hearts
10. Explain why it is important to continue to learn about Jehovah
God.
11. What e?ect did Jesus’ teaching have on his followers?
Remain in God’s Love

239

burning within us as he was speaking to us on the road,
as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”
—Luke 24:32.
12 When you ?rst learned what the Bible really teaches, did you ?nd that your heart began to burn with joy,
zeal, and love for God? No doubt you did. Many have
felt the same way. The challenge now is to keep that
intense love alive and to help it grow. We do not want
to follow the trend of today’s world. Jesus foretold:
“The love of the greater number will grow cold.” (Matthew 24:12) How can you prevent your love for Jehovah and for Bible truths from cooling o??
13 Continue to learn about Jehovah God and Jesus
Christ. (John 17:3) Meditate, or think deeply, on what
you learn from God’s Word, asking yourself: ‘What
does this teach me about Jehovah God? What further
reason does it give me to love him with my whole
heart, mind, and soul?’ (Read 1 Timothy 4:15.) Such
meditation will keep your love for Jehovah burning
brightly.
14 Another way to keep your love for Jehovah burn12, 13. (a) Among the majority of mankind today, what has happened
to love for God and for the Bible? (b) How can we prevent our love
from cooling o??
14. How can prayer help us to keep our love for Jehovah alive?
240

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

ing brightly is to pray regularly. (1 Thessalonians 5:17)
In Chapter 17 of this book, we learned that prayer is a
precious gift from God. Just as human relationships
thrive on regular, open communication, so our relationship with Jehovah stays warm and alive when we
pray to him regularly. It is vital that we never let our
prayers become mechanical—mere routine words that
we repeat over and over without real feeling or meaning. We need to speak to Jehovah as a child would talk
to a beloved father. We want to speak with respect,
of course, but openly, honestly, and from the heart.
(Psalm 62:8) Yes, personal Bible study and heartfelt
prayer are vital aspects of our worship, and they help
us to remain in God’s love.
FIND JOY IN YOUR WORSHIP
15 Personal Bible study and prayer are acts of worship that we may carry out in private. Now, however,
let us consider an aspect of worship that we carry
out publicly: speaking to others about our beliefs.
Have you already shared some Bible truths with others? If so, you have enjoyed a wonderful privilege.
(Luke 1:74) When we share the truths we have learned
15, 16. Why may we rightly view the Kingdom-preaching work as a
privilege and a treasure?
Remain in God’s Love

241

about Jehovah God, we are taking up a very important assignment given to all true Christians—that of
preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom.—Read
Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20.
16 The apostle Paul viewed his ministry as something
precious, calling it a treasure. (2 Corinthians 4:7) Talking to people about Jehovah God and his purposes is
the best work you could do. It is service to the best
Master, and it brings the best bene?ts possible. By engaging in this activity, you are helping honesthearted
people to draw close to our heavenly Father and to get
on the road to everlasting life! What work could be
more satisfying? Furthermore, witnessing about Jehovah and his Word increases your own faith and
strengthens your love for him. And Jehovah appreciates your e?orts. (Hebrews 6:10) Staying busy in such
work helps you to remain in God’s love.—Read 1 Corinthians 15:58.
17 It is important to remember that the Kingdompreaching work is urgent. The Bible says: “Preach the
word; be at it urgently.” (2 Timothy 4:2) Why is doing
this so urgent today? God’s Word tells us: “The great
day of Jehovah is near! It is near and it is approaching
17. Why is the Christian ministry urgent today?
242

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

very quickly!” (Zephaniah 1:14) Yes, the time is coming quickly when Jehovah will bring this whole system
of things to its end. People need to be warned! They
need to know that now is the time to choose Jehovah
as their Sovereign. The end “will not be late!”—Habakkuk 2:3.
18 Jehovah wants us to worship him publicly in association with true Christians. That is why his Word says:
“Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and
?ne works, not forsaking our meeting together, as
some have the custom, but encouraging one another,
and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.”
(Hebrews 10:24, 25) When we gather with fellow believers at Christian meetings, we have a wonderful opportunity to praise and worship our beloved God. We
also build one another up and encourage one another.
19 As we associate with other worshippers of Jehovah, we strengthen the bonds of love and friendship in
the congregation. It is important that we look for
the good in one another, as Jehovah looks for the
good in us. Do not expect perfection from your fellow
18. Why should we worship Jehovah publicly in association with true
Christians?
19. How can we work to strengthen the bonds of love in the Christian
congregation?
Remain in God’s Love

243

believers. Remember that all are at di?erent stages of
spiritual growth and that every one of us makes mistakes. (Read Colossians 3:13.) Seek to build close friendships with those who love Jehovah intensely, and you
will ?nd yourself growing spiritually. Yes, worshipping
Jehovah with your spiritual brothers and sisters will
help you to remain in God’s love. How does Jehovah
reward those who worship him faithfully and thus remain in his love?
REACH OUT FOR “THE REAL LIFE”
20 Jehovah rewards his faithful servants with life, but
life of what kind? Well, are you really living now? Most
of us would say that the answer is obvious. After all,
we breathe, we eat, and we drink. Surely we must be
living. And in our happier moments, we may even say,
“Now this is really living!” However, the Bible indicates that in an important sense, no human today is
really living.
21 God’s Word urges us to “get a ?rm hold on the real
life.” (1 Timothy 6:19) Those words indicate that “the
real life” is something we hope to attain in the future.
Yes, when we are perfect, we will be alive in the fullest sense of the word, for we will be living as God orig20, 21. What is “the real life,” and why is it a wonderful hope?
244

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

inally intended us to live. When we are living on a paradise earth in complete health, peace, and happiness,
we will at last enjoy “the real life”—everlasting life.
(1 Timothy 6:12) Is that not a wonderful hope?
22 How can we “get a ?rm hold on the real life”? In
the same context, Paul urged Christians “to work at
good” and “to be rich in ?ne works.” (1 Timothy 6:18)
Clearly, then, much depends on how we apply the
truths we have learned from the Bible. But did Paul
mean that we earn “the real life” by performing good
works? No, for such marvelous prospects really depend on our receiving “undeserved kindness” from
God. (Romans 5:15) However, Jehovah delights in rewarding those who serve him faithfully. He wants to
see you live “the real life.” Such a happy, peaceful,
everlasting life lies ahead for those who remain in
God’s love.
23 Each of us does well to ask himself, ‘Am I worshipping God in the way he has set out in the Bible?’ If we
make sure, day by day, that the answer is yes, then we
are on the right path. We can be con?dent that Jehovah is our refuge. He will keep his faithful people safe
22. How can you “get a ?rm hold on the real life”?
23. Why is it essential to remain in God’s love?
Remain in God’s Love

245

through the last troubled days of this old system of
things. Jehovah will also deliver us into the glorious
new system of things now near. How thrilled we will
be to see that time! And how delighted we will be that
we made the right choices during these last days! If you
make such choices now, you will enjoy “the real life,”
life as Jehovah God meant it to be, throughout all eternity!

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? We show genuine love for God by observing
his commandments and applying his principles.—1 John 5:3.
? Studying God’s Word, praying to Jehovah in a
heartfelt way, teaching others about him, and
worshipping him at Christian meetings will
help us to remain in God’s love.—Matthew 24:
14; 28:19, 20; John 17:3; 1 Thessalonians 5:17;
Hebrews 10:24, 25.
? Those who remain in God’s love have the hope
of enjoying “the real life.”—1 Timothy 6:12, 19;
Jude 21.

246

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

APPENDIX
TOPIC

PAGE

The Divine Name—Its Use and Its Meaning

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

· · · · ·

252

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

254

How Daniel’s Prophecy Foretells the Messiah’s Arrival
Jesus Christ—The Promised Messiah

248

The Truth About the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit 257
· · · · ·

261

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

263

Why True Christians Do Not Use the Cross in Worship
The Lord’s Evening Meal
—An Observance That Honors God

“Soul” and “Spirit”—What Do These Terms Really Mean? 266
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

271

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

273

What Are Sheol and Hades?
Judgment Day—What Is It?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

276

Who Is Michael the Archangel?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

280

Identifying “Babylon the Great”

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

281

Was Jesus Born in December?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

283

Should We Celebrate Holidays?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

285

1914—A Signi?cant Year in Bible Prophecy

The Divine Name
—Its Use and Its Meaning
IN YOUR copy of the Bible, how is Psalm 83:18 translated? The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures renders
this verse: “May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” A
number of other Bible translations give similar renderings.
However, many translations leave out the name Jehovah,
replacing it with such titles as “Lord” or “Eternal.” What
belongs in this verse? A title or the name Jehovah?
This verse speaks about a name. In the original Hebrew
in which much of the Bible was written, a unique personal name appears here. It is spelled 565
 (YHWH) in Hebrew letters. In English, the common rendering of that
name is “Jehovah.” Does that name occur in only one Bible verse? No. It appears in the original text of the Hebrew Scriptures nearly 7,000 times!
How important is God’s name? Consider the model
prayer that Jesus Christ gave. It begins this way: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sancti?ed.” (Matthew 6:9) Later, Jesus prayed to God: “Father, glorify your
name.” In response, God spoke from heaven, saying: “I
have glori?ed it and will glorify it again.” (John 12:28)
Clearly, God’s name is of the utmost importance. Why,
248

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

then, have some translators left this name out of their
translations of the Bible and replaced it with titles?
There seem to be two main reasons. First, many claim
that the name should not be used because the original way
to pronounce it is unknown today. Ancient Hebrew was
written without vowels. Therefore, no one today can say
for sure exactly how people of Bible times pronounced
YHWH. However, should this prevent us from using God’s
name? In Bible times, the name Jesus may have been pronounced Yeshua or possibly Yehoshua—no one can say for
certain. Yet, people the world over today use di?erent
forms of the name Jesus, pronouncing it in the way that
is common in their language. They do not hesitate to use
the name just because they do not know its ?rst-century
pronunciation. Similarly, if you were to travel to a foreign
land, you might well ?nd that your own name sounds quite
di?erent in another tongue. Hence, uncertainty about the
ancient pronunciation of God’s name is no reason for not
using it.
A second reason often given for omitting God’s name
from the Bible involves a long-standing tradition of the
Jews. Many of them hold that God’s name should never be
pronounced. This belief is evidently based on a misapplication of a Bible law that states: “You must not take up
the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for
Appendix

249

Jehovah will not leave unpunished the one who takes up
His name in a worthless way.”—Exodus 20:7.
This law forbids the misuse of God’s name. But does it
forbid the respectful use of his name? Not at all. The writers of the Hebrew Bible (the “Old Testament”) were all
faithful men who lived by the Law that God gave to the
ancient Israelites. Yet, they made frequent use of God’s
name. For instance, they included it in many psalms that
were sung out loud by crowds of worshippers. Jehovah
God even instructed his worshippers to call on his name,
and faithful ones obeyed. (Joel 2:32; Acts 2:21) Hence,
Christians today do not hesitate to use God’s name respectfully, as Jesus surely did.—John 17:26.
In replacing God’s name with titles, Bible translators
make a serious mistake. They make God seem remote and
impersonal, whereas the Bible urges humans to cultivate
“close friendship with Jehovah.” (Psalm 25:14) Think of a
close friend of yours. How close would you really be if you
never learned your friend’s name? Similarly, when people
are kept in ignorance about God’s name, Jehovah, how can
they become truly close to God? Furthermore, when people do not use God’s name, they also lack knowledge of its
wonderful meaning. What does the divine name mean?
God himself explained the meaning of his name to his
faithful servant Moses. When Moses asked about God’s
250

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

name, Jehovah replied: “I Will Become What I Choose to
Become.” (Exodus 3:14) Rotherham’s translation renders
those words: “I Will Become whatsoever I please.” So Jehovah can become whatever is needed in order to ful?ll
his purposes, and he can cause to happen whatever is required with regard to his creation and the accomplishment
of his purpose.
Suppose that you could become whatever you wanted to
become. What would you do for your friends? If one of
them became seriously ill, you could become a skilled doctor and perform a cure. If another su?ered a ?nancial loss,
you could become a wealthy benefactor and come to his
rescue. The truth is, though, that you are limited in what
you can become. All of us are. As you study the Bible, you
will be amazed to see how Jehovah becomes whatever is
needed in order to ful?ll his promises. And it pleases
him to use his power in behalf of those who love him.
(2 Chronicles 16:9) These beautiful facets of Jehovah’s
personality are lost to those who do not know his name.
Clearly, the name Jehovah belongs in the Bible. Knowing its meaning and using it freely in our worship are powerful aids in drawing closer to our heavenly Father, Jehovah.1
1 For more information on God’s name, its meaning, and reasons to
use it in worship, see the brochure The Divine Name That Will Endure
Forever, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. See also the New World
Translation, 2013 edition, Appendix A4.
Appendix

251

How Daniel’s Prophecy Foretells
the Messiah’s Arrival
THE prophet Daniel lived more than 500 years before
the birth of Jesus. Nevertheless, Jehovah revealed to
Daniel information that would make it possible to pinpoint the time when Jesus would be anointed, or appointed, as the Messiah, or Christ. Daniel was told: “You
should know and understand that from the issuing of the
word to restore and to rebuild Jerusalem until Messiah
the Leader, there will be 7 weeks, also 62 weeks.”—Daniel 9:25.
To determine the time of the Messiah’s arrival, ?rst we
need to learn the starting point of the period leading to
the Messiah. According to the prophecy, it is “from the
issuing of the word to restore and to rebuild Jerusalem.”
When did this “issuing of the word” take place? According to the Bible writer Nehemiah, the word to rebuild the
walls around Jerusalem was issued “in the 20th year of
King Artaxerxes.” (Nehemiah 2:1, 5-8) Historians con?rm
that the year 474 B.C.E. was Artaxerxes’ ?rst full year as
ruler. Therefore, the 20th year of his rule was 455 B.C.E.
Now we have the starting point for Daniel’s Messianic
prophecy, that is, 455 B.C.E.
252

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Daniel indicates how long the time period leading to
the arrival of “Messiah the Leader” would last. The
prophecy mentions “7 weeks, also 62 weeks”—a total of
69 weeks. How long is this period of time? Several Bible
translations note that these are, not weeks of seven days,
but weeks of years. That is, each week represents seven
years. This concept of weeks of years, or seven-year units,

“70 WEEKS”
490 years
“7 weeks”

“62 weeks”

1 week

(49 years)

(434 years)

(7 years)

455

406

C.E. )

29

33

36

Messiah
arrives

“The word
to restore
. . . Jerusalem”

Messiah
“cut o?”
Jerusalem
rebuilt

Appendix

& B.C.E.

End of the
“70 weeks”

253

was familiar to Jews of ancient times. For instance, they
observed a Sabbath year every seventh year. (Exodus 23:
10, 11) Therefore, the prophetic 69 weeks amount to 69
units of 7 years each, or a total of 483 years.
Now all we must do is count. If we count from
455 B.C.E., a period of 483 years takes us to the year
29 C.E. That was exactly the year when Jesus was baptized and became the Messiah!1 (Luke 3:1, 2, 21, 22) Is
that not a remarkable ful?llment of Bible prophecy?
1 From 455 B.C.E. to 1 B.C.E. is 454 years. From 1 B.C.E. to 1 C.E.
is one year (there was no zero year). And from 1 C.E. to 29 C.E. is
28 years. Adding these three ?gures gives us the total of 483 years.
Jesus was “cut o?” in death in 33 C.E., during the 70th week of years.
(Daniel 9:24, 26) See Pay Attention to Daniel’s Prophecy! chapter 11,
and Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 2, pages 899-901. Both are published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Jesus Christ
—The Promised Messiah
TO HELP us identify the Messiah, Jehovah God inspired
many Bible prophets to provide details about the birth, the
ministry, and the death of this promised Deliverer. All
these Bible prophecies were ful?lled in Jesus Christ. They
are amazingly accurate and detailed. To illustrate this, let
us consider a few prophecies that foretold events related
to the Messiah’s birth and childhood.
254

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

P R O P H E C I E S R E GA R D I N G T H E M E S S I A H
EVENT

PROPHECY

FULFILLMENT

Born of the tribe of Judah

Genesis 49:10

Luke 3:23-33

Born of a virgin

Isaiah 7:14

Matthew 1:18-25

Descended from King David

Isaiah 9:7

Matthew 1:1, 6-17

Declared by Jehovah to be his Son Psalm 2:7

Matthew 3:17

Not believed in

John 12:37, 38

Isaiah 53:1

Entered Jerusalem riding a donkey Zechariah 9:9

Matthew 21:1-9

Betrayed by a close associate

Psalm 41:9

John 13:18, 21-30

Betrayed for 30 silver pieces

Zechariah 11:12 Matthew 26:14-16

Silent before his accusers

Isaiah 53:7

Matthew 27:11-14

Lots cast for his garments

Psalm 22:18

Matthew 27:35

Mocked while on the stake

Psalm 22:7, 8

Matthew 27:39-43

None of his bones broken

Psalm 34:20

John 19:33, 36

Buried with the rich

Isaiah 53:9

Matthew 27:57-60

Raised before corruption

Psalm 16:10

Acts 2:24, 27

Exalted to God’s right hand

Psalm 110:1

Acts 7:56

The prophet Isaiah foretold that the Messiah would be
a descendant of King David. (Isaiah 9:7) Jesus was indeed
born in David’s line.—Matthew 1:1, 6-17.
Micah, another prophet of God, foretold that this child
would eventually become a ruler and that he would be
Appendix

255

born in “Bethlehem Ephrathah.” (Micah 5:2) At the time
of Jesus’ birth, there were two towns in Israel that were
named Bethlehem. One was situated near Nazareth in the
northern region of the country, and the other, near Jerusalem in Judah. Bethlehem near Jerusalem was formerly
called Ephrathah. Jesus was born in that town, exactly as
the prophecy foretold!—Matthew 2:1.
Another Bible prophecy foretold that the Son of God
would be called “out of Egypt.” The child Jesus was taken into Egypt. He was brought back after the death of Herod, thus ful?lling the prophecy.—Hosea 11:1; Matthew
2:15.
In the chart on page 255, the scriptures listed under the
heading “Prophecy” contain details concerning the Messiah. Please compare these with the scriptures listed under
the heading “Ful?llment.” Doing so will further strengthen your faith in the truthfulness of God’s Word.
While you examine these scriptures, keep in mind that
those of a prophetic nature were written down hundreds
of years before Jesus’ birth. Jesus stated: “All the things
written about me in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and Psalms must be ful?lled.” (Luke 24:44) As you can
verify in your own copy of the Bible, ful?lled they were
—in every detail!
256

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

The Truth About the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit
PEOPLE who believe the Trinity teaching say that God consists of three persons—the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit. Each of these three persons is said to be equal to
the others, almighty, and without beginning. According to
the Trinity doctrine, therefore, the Father is God, the Son
is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, yet there is only one
God.
Many who believe the Trinity admit that they are not able
to explain this teaching. Still, they may feel that it is taught
in the Bible. It is worth noting that the word “Trinity” never occurs in the Bible. But is the idea of a Trinity found
there? To answer this question, let us look at a scripture
that supporters often cite to uphold the Trinity.

“THE WORD WAS G OD”
John 1:1 states: “In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God.” (King James
Version) Later in the same chapter, the apostle John clearly shows that “the Word” is Jesus. (John 1:14) Since the
Word is called God, however, some conclude that the Son
and the Father must be part of the same God.
Bear in mind that this part of the Bible was originally
written in Greek. Later, translators rendered the Greek
Appendix

257

text into other languages. A number of Bible translators,
though, did not use the phrase “the Word was God.” Why
not? Based on their knowledge of Biblical Greek, those
translators concluded that the phrase “the Word was God”
should be translated di?erently. How? Here are a few examples: “The Logos [Word] was divine.” (A New Translation
of the Bible) “The Word was a god.” (The New Testament in
an Improved Version) “The Word was with God and shared
his nature.” (The Translator’s New Testament) According to
these translations, the Word is not God himself.1 Instead,
because of his high position among Jehovah’s creatures, the
Word is referred to as “a god.” Here the term “god” means
“mighty one.”

GET MORE FACTS
Most people do not know Biblical Greek. So how can you
know what the apostle John really meant? Think of this example: A schoolteacher explains a subject to his students.
Afterward, the students di?er on how to understand the explanation. How can the students resolve the matter? They
could ask the teacher for more information. No doubt,
learning additional facts would help them to understand
the subject better. Similarly, to grasp the meaning of John
1:1, you can look in the Gospel of John for more informa1 For a further discussion of John 1:1, see pages 24-25 of the November 1, 2008, issue of The Watchtower, published by Jehovah’s
Witnesses.
258

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

tion on Jesus’ position. Learning additional facts on this
subject will help you to draw the right conclusion.
For instance, consider what John further writes in chapter 1, verse 18: “No man has seen [Almighty] God at any
time.” However, humans have seen Jesus, the Son, for John
says: “The Word [Jesus] was made ?esh, and dwelt among
us, and we beheld his glory.” (John 1:14, KJ) How, then,
could the Son be part of Almighty God? John also states
that the Word was “with God.” But how can an individual
be with someone and at the same time be that person? Moreover, as recorded at John 17:3, Jesus makes a clear distinction between himself and his heavenly Father. He calls his
Father “the only true God.” And toward the end of his Gospel, John sums up matters by saying: “These have been written down so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of God.” (John 20:31) Notice that Jesus is called,
not God, but the Son of God. This additional information
provided in the Gospel of John shows how John 1:1 should
be understood. Jesus, the Word, is “a god” in the sense that
he has a high position but is not the same as Almighty God.

CONFIRM THE FACTS
Think again about the example of the schoolteacher and
the students. Imagine that some still have doubts, even after listening to the teacher’s additional explanation. What
could they do? They could turn to another teacher for
Appendix

259

further information on the same subject. If the second
teacher con?rms the explanation of the ?rst one, the doubts
of most students may be put to rest. Similarly, if you are
not sure what the Bible writer John was really saying about
the relationship between Jesus and Almighty God, you
could turn to another Bible writer for further information.
Consider what was written by Matthew, for example. Regarding the end of this system of things, he quotes Jesus as
saying: “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.” (Matthew 24:36) How do these words con?rm that
Jesus is not Almighty God?
Jesus says that the Father knows more than the Son does.
If Jesus were part of Almighty God, however, he would
know the same facts as his Father. So, then, the Son and
the Father cannot be equal. Yet, some will say: ‘Jesus had
two natures. Here he speaks as a man.’ But even if that were
so, what about the holy spirit? If it is part of the same God
as the Father, why does Jesus not say that it knows what
the Father knows?
As you continue your Bible studies, you will become familiar with many more Bible passages that have a bearing
on this subject. They con?rm the truth about the Father,
the Son, and the holy spirit.—Psalm 90:2; Acts 7:55; Colossians 1:15.
260

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Why True Christians Do Not Use
the Cross in Worship
THE cross is loved and respected by millions of people.
The Encyclopædia Britannica calls the cross “the principal symbol of the Christian religion.” Nevertheless, true
Christians do not use the cross in worship. Why not?
An important reason is that Jesus Christ did not die on
a cross. The Greek word generally translated “cross” is
stau·ros. It basically means “an upright pale or stake.” The
Companion Bible points out: “[Stau·ros] never means two
pieces of timber placed across one another at any angle
. . . There is nothing in the Greek of the [New Testament]
even to imply two pieces of timber.”
In several texts, Bible writers use another word for the
instrument of Jesus’ death. It is the Greek word xylon.
(Acts 5:30; 10:39; 13:29; Galatians 3:13; 1 Peter 2:24) This
word simply means “timber” or “a stick, club, or tree.”
Explaining why a simple stake was often used for executions, the book Das Kreuz und die Kreuzigung (The Cross
and the Cruci?xion), by Hermann Fulda, states: “Trees
were not everywhere available at the places chosen for
public execution. So a simple beam was sunk into the
ground. On this the outlaws, with hands raised upward
and often also with their feet, were bound or nailed.”
Appendix

261

The most convincing proof of all, however, comes from
God’s Word. The apostle Paul says: “Christ purchased us,
releasing us from the curse of the Law by becoming a
curse instead of us, because it is written: ‘Accursed is
every man hung upon a stake [“a tree,” King James Version].’ ” (Galatians 3:13) Here Paul quotes Deuteronomy
21:22, 23, which clearly refers to a stake, not a cross. Since
such a means of execution made the person “a curse,” it
would not be proper for Christians to decorate their
homes with images of Christ on a cross.
There is no evidence that for the ?rst 300 years after
Christ’s death, those claiming to be Christians used the
cross in worship. In the fourth century, however, pagan
Emperor Constantine became a convert to apostate Christianity and promoted the cross as its symbol. Whatever
Constantine’s motives, the cross had nothing to do with
Jesus Christ. The cross is, in fact, pagan in origin. The
New Catholic Encyclopedia admits: “The cross is found in
both pre-Christian and non-Christian cultures.” Various
other authorities have linked the cross with nature worship and pagan sex rites.
Why, then, was this pagan symbol promoted? Apparently, to make it easier for pagans to accept “Christianity.”
Nevertheless, devotion to any pagan symbol is clearly condemned by the Bible. (2 Corinthians 6:14-18) The Scrip262

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

tures also forbid all forms of idolatry. (Exodus 20:4, 5;
1 Corinthians 10:14) With very good reason, therefore,
true Christians do not use the cross in worship.1
1 For a more detailed discussion of the cross, see pages 89-93 of
the book Reasoning From the Scriptures, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

The Lord’s Evening Meal
—An Observance That Honors God
CHRISTIANS are commanded to observe the Memorial
of Christ’s death. This observance is also called “the
Lord’s Evening Meal.” (1 Corinthians 11:20) What is so
signi?cant about it? When and how should it be observed?
Jesus Christ instituted this observance on the night of
the Jewish Passover in 33 C.E. The Passover was a celebration held just once a year, on the 14th day of the Jewish month Nisan. To calculate that date, the Jews evidently waited for the spring equinox. This is the day when
there are approximately 12 hours of daylight and 12 hours
of darkness. The ?rst observable new moon nearest to the
spring equinox marked the ?rst day of Nisan. Passover began 13 days later.
Jesus celebrated the Passover with his apostles, dismissed Judas Iscariot, and then instituted the Lord’s
Appendix

263

Evening Meal. This meal replaced the Jewish Passover
and therefore should be observed only once a year.
The Gospel of Matthew reports: “Jesus took a loaf, and
after saying a blessing, he broke it, and giving it to the
disciples, he said: ‘Take, eat. This means my body.’ And
taking a cup, he o?ered thanks and gave it to them, saying: ‘Drink out of it, all of you, for this means my “blood
of the covenant,” which is to be poured out in behalf of
many for forgiveness of sins.’ ”—Matthew 26:26-28.
Some believe that Jesus turned the bread into his literal ?esh and the wine into his blood. However, Jesus’ ?eshly body was still intact when he o?ered this bread. Were
Jesus’ apostles really eating his literal ?esh and drinking
his blood? No, for that would have been cannibalism and
a violation of God’s law. (Genesis 9:3, 4; Leviticus 17:10)
According to Luke 22:20, Jesus said: “This cup means the
new covenant by virtue of my blood, which is to be
poured out in your behalf.” Did that cup literally become
“the new covenant”? That would be impossible, since a
covenant is an agreement, not a tangible object.
Hence, both the bread and the wine are only symbols.
The bread symbolizes Christ’s perfect body. Jesus used a
loaf of bread left over from the Passover meal. The loaf
was made without any leaven, or yeast. (Exodus 12:8) The
Bible often uses leaven as a symbol of sin or corruption.
264

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

The bread therefore represents the perfect body that Jesus sacri?ced. It was free of sin.—Matthew 16:11, 12;
1 Corinthians 5:6, 7; 1 Peter 2:22; 1 John 2:1, 2.
The red wine represents Jesus’ blood. That blood makes
valid the new covenant. Jesus said that his blood was
poured out “for forgiveness of sins.” Humans can thus become clean in God’s eyes and can enter into the new covenant with Jehovah. (Hebrews 9:14; 10:16, 17) This covenant, or contract, makes it possible for 144,000 faithful
Christians to go to heaven. There they will serve as kings
and priests for the blessing of all mankind.—Genesis 22:18;
Jeremiah 31:31-33; 1 Peter 2:9; Revelation 5:9, 10; 14:1-3.
Who should partake of these Memorial emblems? Logically, only those in the new covenant—that is, those who
have the hope of going to heaven—should partake of the
bread and the wine. God’s holy spirit convinces such ones
that they have been selected to be heavenly kings. (Romans
8:16) They are also in the Kingdom covenant with Jesus.
—Luke 22:29.
What about those who have the hope of living forever in
Paradise on earth? They obey Jesus’ command and attend
the Lord’s Evening Meal, but they come as respectful observers, not partakers. Once a year after sundown on Nisan 14, Jehovah’s Witnesses observe the Lord’s Evening
Meal. Although only a few thousand worldwide profess to
Appendix

265

have the heavenly hope, this observance is precious to all
Christians. It is an occasion when all can re?ect on the superlative love of Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.—John
3:16.

“Soul” and “Spirit”
—What Do These Terms Really Mean?
WHEN you hear the terms “soul” and “spirit,” what comes
to your mind? Many believe that these words mean something invisible and immortal that exists inside us. They
think that at death this invisible part of a human leaves the
body and lives on. Since this belief is so widespread, many
are surprised to learn that it is not at all what the Bible
teaches. What, then, is the soul, and what is the spirit, according to God’s Word?

“S OUL” AS USED IN THE BIBLE
First, consider the soul. You may remember that the Bible was originally written mainly in Hebrew and Greek.
When writing about the soul, the Bible writers used the Hebrew word nephesh or the Greek word psy·khe. These two
words occur well over 800 times in the Scriptures, and the
New World Translation renders them “soul,” either in the
main text or in footnotes. When you examine the way
“soul” or “souls” is used in the Bible, it becomes evident
266

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

that this word basically refers to (1) people, (2) animals, or
(3) the life that a person or an animal has. Let us consider some scriptures that present these three di?erent senses.
People. “In Noah’s day . . . a few people, that is, eight

souls, were carried safely through the water.” (1 Peter 3:
20) Here the word “souls” clearly stands for people—Noah,
his wife, his three sons, and their wives. Exodus 16:16 mentions instructions given to the Israelites regarding the gathering of manna. They were told to gather it “according to
the number of the people [“souls,” footnote]” that each of
them had in his tent. So the amount of manna that was
gathered was based on the number of people in each family. Some other Biblical examples of the application of
“soul” or “souls” to a person or to people are in the footnotes found at Genesis 46:18; Joshua 11:11; Acts 27:37; and
Romans 13:1.
Animals. In the Bible’s creation account, we read: “Then

God said: ‘Let the waters swarm with living creatures
[“souls,” footnote], and let ?ying creatures ?y above the
earth across the expanse of the heavens.’ Then God said:
‘Let the earth bring forth living creatures [“souls,” footnote] according to their kinds, domestic animals and creeping animals and wild animals of the earth according to
their kinds.’ And it was so.” (Genesis 1:20, 24) In this
passage, ?sh, domestic animals, and wild animals are all
Appendix

267

referred to by the same word—“souls.” Birds and other animals are called souls in the footnotes found at Genesis 9:
10; Leviticus 11:46; and Numbers 31:28.
Life of a person. Sometimes the word “soul” means the life

of a person. Jehovah told Moses: “All the men who were
seeking to kill you [“seeking your soul,” footnote] are
dead.” (Exodus 4:19) What were Moses’ enemies trying to
do? They were seeking to take Moses’ life. Earlier, while
Rachel was giving birth to her son Benjamin, “her life was
slipping away [“her soul was going out,” footnote].” (Genesis 35:16-19) At that time, Rachel lost her life. Consider
also Jesus’ words: “I am the ?ne shepherd; the ?ne shepherd surrenders his life [“soul,” footnote] in behalf of the
sheep.” (John 10:11) Jesus gave his soul, or life, in behalf
of mankind. In these Bible passages, or in the footnotes,
the word “soul” clearly refers to the life of a person. You
will ?nd more examples of this sense of “soul” either in
the text or in the footnotes found at 1 Kings 17:17-23; Matthew 10:39; John 15:13; and Acts 20:10.
A further study of God’s Word will show you that nowhere in the entire Bible are the terms “immortal” or
“everlasting” linked with the word “soul.” Instead, the
Scriptures state that a soul is mortal, meaning that it dies.
(Ezekiel 18:4, 20) Therefore, the Bible calls someone who
has died simply a “dead soul.”—Leviticus 21:11, footnote.
268

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

THE “SPIRIT” IDENTIFIED
Let us now consider the Bible’s use of the term “spirit.”
Some people think that “spirit” is just another word for
“soul.” However, that is not the case. The Bible makes clear
that “spirit” and “soul” refer to two di?erent things. How
do they di?er?
Bible writers used the Hebrew word ruach or the Greek
word pneuma when writing about the “spirit.” The Scriptures themselves indicate the meaning of those words. For
instance, Psalm 104:29 states: “If you [Jehovah] take away
their spirit [ruach], they die and return to the dust.” And
James 2:26 notes that “the body without spirit [pneuma] is
dead.” In these verses, then, “spirit” refers to that which
gives life to a body. Without spirit, the body is dead. Therefore, in the Bible the word ruach is translated not only as
“spirit” but also as “force,” or life-force. For example, concerning the Flood in Noah’s day, God said: “I am going to
bring ?oodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the
heavens all ?esh that has the breath [ruach] of life.” (Genesis 6:17; 7:15, 22) “Spirit” thus refers to an invisible force
(the spark of life) that animates all living creatures.
The soul and the spirit are not the same. The body needs
the spirit in much the same way as a radio needs electricity—in order to function. To illustrate this further, think
of a portable radio. When you put batteries in a portable
Appendix

269

radio and turn it on, the electricity stored in the batteries
brings the radio to life, so to speak. Without batteries, however, the radio is dead. So is another kind of radio when it
is unplugged from an electric outlet. Similarly, the spirit
is the force that brings our body to life. Also, like electricity, the spirit has no feeling and cannot think. It is an impersonal force. But without that spirit, or life-force, our
bodies “die and return to the dust” as the psalmist stated.
Speaking about man’s death, Ecclesiastes 12:7 states:
“The dust [of his body] returns to the earth, just as it was,
and the spirit returns to the true God who gave it.” When
the spirit, or life-force, leaves the body, the body dies and
returns to where it came from—the earth. Comparably, the
life-force returns to where it came from—God. (Job 34:14,
15; Psalm 36:9) This does not mean that the life-force actually travels to heaven. Rather, it means that for someone
who dies, any hope of future life rests with Jehovah God.
His life is in God’s hands, so to speak. Only by God’s power can the spirit, or life-force, be given back so that a person may live again.
How comforting it is to know that this is exactly what
God will do for all of those resting in “the memorial
tombs”! (John 5:28, 29) At the time of the resurrection, Jehovah will form a new body for a person sleeping in death
and bring it to life by putting spirit, or life-force, in it.
What a joyful day that will be!
270

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

If you would like to learn more about the terms “soul”
and “spirit” as used in the Bible, you will ?nd valuable information in the brochure What Happens to Us When We Die?
and on pages 375-384 of the book Reasoning From the Scriptures, both published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

What Are Sheol and Hades?
IN ITS original languages, the Bible uses the Hebrew word
sheohl and its Greek equivalent haides more than 70
times. Both words are related to death. Some Bible translations render them as “grave,” “hell,” or “pit.” However,
in most languages there are no words that convey the precise sense of these Hebrew and Greek words. The New
World Translation therefore uses the words “Sheol” and
“Hades” in footnotes. What do these words really mean?
Let us note how they are used in di?erent Bible passages.
Ecclesiastes 9:10 states: “There is no work nor planning
nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave [“Sheol,” footnote], where you are going.” Does this mean that Sheol refers to a speci?c, or individual, grave site where we may
have buried a loved one? No. When the Bible refers to a
speci?c burial place, or grave, it uses other Hebrew and
Greek words, not sheohl and haides. (Genesis 23:7-9; Matthew 28:1) Also, the Bible does not use the word “Sheol”
Appendix

271

for a grave where several individuals are buried together,
such as a family grave or a mass grave.—Genesis 49:30, 31.
To what kind of place, then, does “Sheol” refer? God’s
Word indicates that “Sheol,” or “Hades,” refers to something much more than even a large mass grave. For instance, Isaiah 5:14 notes that the Grave, or Sheol, “has enlarged itself and has opened its mouth wide without limit.”
Although Sheol has already swallowed, so to speak, countless dead people, it always seems to hunger for more.
(Proverbs 30:15, 16) Unlike any literal burial site, which
can hold only a limited number of the dead, ‘the Grave is
never satis?ed.’ (Proverbs 27:20) That is, Sheol never becomes full. It has no limits. Sheol, or Hades, is thus not a
literal place in a speci?c location. Rather, it is the common grave of dead mankind, the ?gurative location where
most of mankind sleep in death.
The Bible teaching of the resurrection helps us to gain
further insight into the meaning of “Sheol” and “Hades.”
God’s Word associates Sheol and Hades with the sort of
death from which there will be a resurrection.1 (Job 14:13;
Acts 2:31; Revelation 20:13) God’s Word also shows that
those in Sheol, or Hades, include not only those who have
1 In contrast, the dead who will not be raised are described as being, not in Sheol, or Hades, but “in Gehenna.” (Matthew 5:30; 10:28;
23:33) Like Sheol and Hades, Gehenna is not a literal place.
272

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

served Jehovah but also many who have not served him.
(Genesis 37:35; Psalm 55:15) Therefore, the Bible teaches
that there will be “a resurrection of both the righteous and
the unrighteous.”—Acts 24:15.

Judgment Day—What Is It?
HOW do you picture Judgment Day? Many think that one
by one, billions of souls will be brought before the throne
of God. There, judgment will be passed on each individual. Some will be rewarded with heavenly bliss, and others
will be condemned to eternal torment. However, the Bible
paints quite a di?erent picture of this period of time.
God’s Word portrays it, not as a terrifying time, but as a
time of hope and restoration.
At Revelation 20:11, 12, we read the apostle John’s description of Judgment Day: “I saw a great white throne
and the One seated on it. From before him the earth and
the heaven ?ed away, and no place was found for them.
And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and scrolls were opened. But another
scroll was opened; it is the scroll of life. The dead were
judged out of those things written in the scrolls according
to their deeds.” Who is the Judge described here?
Jehovah Go d is the ultimate Judge of mankind.
Appendix

273

However, he delegates the actual work of judging. According to Acts 17:31, the apostle Paul said that God “has set
a day on which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth
in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed.” This
appointed Judge is the resurrected Jesus Christ. (John 5:
22) When, though, does Judgment Day begin? How long
does it last?
The book of Revelation shows that Judgment Day begins after the war of Armageddon, when Satan’s system on
earth will be destroyed.1 (Revelation 16:14, 16; 19:19–20:3)
After Armageddon, Satan and his demons will be imprisoned in an abyss for a thousand years. During that time,
the 144,000 heavenly joint heirs will be judges and will
rule “as kings with the Christ for 1,000 years.” (Revelation
14:1-3; 20:1-4; Romans 8:17) Judgment Day is not some
hurried event lasting a mere 24 hours. It lasts a thousand
years.
During that thousand-year period, Jesus Christ will
“judge the living and the dead.” (2 Timothy 4:1) “The living” will be the “great crowd” that survives Armageddon. (Revelation 7:9-17) The apostle John also saw “the
dead . . . standing before the throne” of judgment. As Jesus promised, “those in the memorial tombs will hear
1 Regarding Armageddon, please see Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 1, pages 594-595, 1037-1038, and chapter 20 of Worship the Only
True God, both published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
274

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

[Christ’s] voice and come out” by means of a resurrection.
(John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15) But on what basis will all be
judged?
According to the apostle John’s vision, “scrolls were
opened,” and “the dead were judged out of those things
written in the scrolls according to their deeds.” (Revelation 20:12) Are these scrolls the record of people’s past
deeds? No, the judgment will not focus on what people
did before they died. How do we know that? The Bible
says: “The one who has died has been acquitted from his
sin.” (Romans 6:7) Those resurrected thus come to life
with a clean slate, so to speak. The scrolls must therefore represent God’s further requirements. To live forever, both Armageddon survivors and resurrected ones
will have to obey God’s commandments, including whatever new requirements Jehovah might reveal during the
thousand years. Thus, individuals will be judged on the basis of what they do during Judgment Day.
Judgment Day will give billions of people their ?rst opportunity to learn about God’s will and to conform to it.
This means that a large-scale educational work will take
place. Indeed, ‘the inhabitants of the land will learn about
righteousness.’ (Isaiah 26:9) However, not all will be willing to conform to God’s will. Isaiah 26:10 says: “Even if
the wicked is shown favor, he will not learn righteousness.
Appendix

275

Even in the land of uprightness he will act wickedly, and
he will not see the majesty of Jehovah.” These wicked ones
will be put to death permanently during Judgment Day.
—Isaiah 65:20.
By the end of Judgment Day, surviving humans will have
“come to life” fully as perfect humans. (Revelation 20:5)
Judgment Day will thus see the restoration of mankind to
its original perfect state. (1 Corinthians 15:24-28) Then a
?nal test will take place. Satan will be released from his
imprisonment and allowed to try to mislead mankind one
last time. (Revelation 20:3, 7-10) Those who resist him will
enjoy the complete ful?llment of the Bible’s promise: “The
righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever
on it.” (Psalm 37:29) Yes, Judgment Day will be a blessing
to all faithful mankind!

1914—A Significant Year in
Bible Prophecy
DECADES in advance, Bible students proclaimed that
there would be signi?cant developments in 1914. What
were these, and what evidence points to 1914 as such an
important year?
As recorded at Luke 21:24, Jesus said: “Jerusalem will
be trampled on by the nations until the appointed times
276

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

of the nations [“the times of the Gentiles,” King James Version] are ful?lled.” Jerusalem had been the capital city of
the Jewish nation—the seat of rulership of the line of
kings from the house of King David. (Psalm 48:1, 2) However, these kings were unique among national leaders.
They sat on “Jehovah’s throne” as representatives of God
himself. (1 Chronicles 29:23) Jerusalem was thus a symbol
of Jehovah’s rulership.
How and when, though, did God’s rulership begin to
be “trampled on by the nations”? This happened in
607 B.C.E. when Jerusalem was conquered by the Babylonians. “Jehovah’s throne” became vacant, and the line
of kings who descended from David was interrupted.

“SEVEN TIMES”
2,520 years
606 1/4 years

1,913 3/4 years

October 607 B.C.E. to
December 31, 1 B.C.E.

January 1, 1 C.E. to
October 1914

& B.C.E. C.E. )

607

“Jerusalem will be
trampled on by the
nations”

Appendix

1914

The coming of “the
one who has the
legal right”

277

(2 Kings 25:1-26) Would this ‘trampling’ go on forever?
No, for the prophecy of Ezekiel said regarding Jerusalem’s
last king, Zedekiah: “Remove the turban, and take o? the
crown. . . . It will not belong to anyone until the one who
has the legal right comes, and I will give it to him.” (Ezekiel 21:26, 27) “The one who has the legal right” to the
Davidic crown is Christ Jesus. (Luke 1:32, 33) So the
‘trampling’ would end when Jesus became King.
When would that grand event occur? Jesus showed that
the Gentiles would rule for a ?xed period of time. The account in Daniel chapter 4 holds the key to knowing how
long that period would last. It relates a prophetic dream
experienced by King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. He saw
a tree of enormous height that was chopped down. Its
stump could not grow because it was banded with iron
and copper. An angel declared: “Let seven times pass over
it.”—Daniel 4:10-16.
In the Bible, trees are sometimes used to represent rulership. (Ezekiel 17:22-24; 31:2-5) So the chopping down of
the symbolic tree represents how God’s rulership, as expressed through the kings at Jerusalem, would be interrupted. However, the vision served notice that this ‘trampling of Jerusalem’ would be temporary—a period of
“seven times.” How long a period is that?
278

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Revelation 12:6, 14 indicates that three and a half times
equal “1,260 days.” “Seven times” would therefore last
twice as long, or 2,520 days. But the Gentile nations did
not stop ‘trampling’ on God’s rulership a mere 2,520 days
after Jerusalem’s fall. Evidently, then, this prophecy covers a much longer period of time. On the basis of Numbers 14:34 and Ezekiel 4:6, which speak of “a day for a
year,” the “seven times” would cover 2,520 years.
The 2,520 years began in October 607 B.C.E., when Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians and the Davidic king was
taken o? his throne. The period ended in October 1914.
At that time, “the appointed times of the nations” ended,
and Jesus Christ was installed as God’s heavenly King.1
—Psalm 2:1-6; Daniel 7:13, 14.
Just as Jesus predicted, his “presence” as heavenly King
has been marked by dramatic world developments—war,
famine, earthquakes, pestilences. (Matthew 24:3-8; Luke
21:11) Such developments bear powerful testimony to the
fact that 1914 indeed marked the birth of God’s heavenly
Kingdom and the beginning of “the last days” of this present wicked system of things.—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
1 From October 607 B.C.E. to October 1 B.C.E. is 606 years. Since
there is no zero year, from October 1 B.C.E. to October 1914 C.E. is
1,914 years. By adding 606 years and 1,914 years, we get 2,520 years.
For information on Jerusalem’s fall in 607 B.C.E., see the article
“Chronology” in Insight on the Scriptures, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Appendix

279

Who Is Michael the Archangel?
THE spirit creature called Michael is not mentioned often
in the Bible. However, when he is referred to, he is in action. In the book of Daniel, Michael is battling wicked angels; in the letter of Jude, he is disputing with Satan; and
in Revelation, he is waging war with the Devil and his demons. By defending Jehovah’s rulership and ?ghting God’s
enemies, Michael lives up to the meaning of his name
—“Who Is Like God?” But who is Michael?
At times, individuals are known by more than one name.
For example, the patriarch Jacob is also known as Israel,
and the apostle Peter, as Simon. (Genesis 49:1, 2; Matthew
10:2) Likewise, the Bible indicates that Michael is another
name for Jesus Christ, before and after his life on earth.
Let us consider Scriptural reasons for drawing that conclusion.
Archangel. God’s Word refers to Michael “the archangel.”

(Jude 9) This term means “chief angel.” Notice that Michael is called the archangel. This suggests that there is
only one such angel. In fact, the term “archangel” occurs
in the Bible only in the singular, never in the plural. Moreover, Jesus is linked with the o?ce of archangel. Regarding the resurrected Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians 4:
16 states: “The Lord himself will descend from heaven
280

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice.” Thus
the voice of Jesus is described as being that of an archangel. This scripture therefore suggests that Jesus himself
is the archangel Michael.
Army Leader. The Bible states that “Michael and his an-

gels battled with the dragon . . . and its angels.” (Revelation 12:7) Thus, Michael is the Leader of an army of faithful angels. Revelation also describes Jesus as the Leader of
an army of faithful angels. (Revelation 19:14-16) And the
apostle Paul speci?cally mentions “the Lord Jesus” and
“his powerful angels.” (2 Thessalonians 1:7) So the Bible
speaks of both Michael and “his angels” and Jesus and
“his angels.” (Matthew 13:41; 16:27; 24:31; 1 Peter 3:22)
Since God’s Word nowhere indicates that there are two armies of faithful angels in heaven—one headed by Michael
and one headed by Jesus—it is logical to conclude that Michael is none other than Jesus Christ in his heavenly role.1
1 More information showing that the name Michael applies to
God’s Son is found in Volume 2, pages 393-394, of Insight on the
Scriptures, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Identifying “Babylon the Great”
THE book of Revelation contains expressions that are not
to be understood literally. (Revelation 1:1) For example, it
mentions a woman with the name “Babylon the Great”
Appendix

281

written on her forehead. This woman is said to be sitting
on “crowds and nations.” (Revelation 17:1, 5, 15) Since no
literal woman could do this, Babylon the Great must be
symbolic. So, what does this symbolic prostitute represent?
At Revelation 17:18, the same ?gurative woman is described as “the great city that has a kingdom over the kings
of the earth.” The term “city” indicates an organized group
of people. Since this “great city” has control over “the kings
of the earth,” the woman named Babylon the Great must
be an in?uential organization that is international in scope.
It can rightly be called a world empire. What kind of empire? A religious one. Notice how some related passages in
the book of Revelation lead us to this conclusion.
An empire can be political, commercial, or religious. The
woman named Babylon the Great is not a political empire
because God’s Word states that “the kings of the earth,” or
the political elements of this world, “committed sexual immorality” with her. She has practiced such immorality by
forming alliances with the rulers of this earth and has done
whatever is necessary in order to gain power and in?uence
over them. That is why she is called “the great prostitute.”
—Revelation 17:1, 2; James 4:4.
Babylon the Great cannot be a commercial empire because “the merchants of the earth,” representing the commercial elements, will be mourning her at the time of her
282

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

destruction. In fact, both kings and merchants are described as looking at Babylon the Great from “a distance.”
(Revelation 18:3, 9, 10, 15-17) Therefore, it is reasonable to
conclude that Babylon the Great is, not a political or a
commercial empire, but a religious one.
The religious identity of Babylon the Great is further
con?rmed by the statement that she misleads all the nations by means of her “spiritistic practices.” (Revelation 18:
23) Since all forms of spiritism are religious and demoninspired, it is not surprising that the Bible calls Babylon the
Great “a dwelling place of demons.” (Revelation 18:2; Deuteronomy 18:10-12) This empire is also described as being
actively opposed to true religion, persecuting “prophets”
and “holy ones.” (Revelation 18:24) In fact, Babylon the
Great has such deep hatred for true religion that she violently persecutes and even murders “the witnesses of Jesus.” (Revelation 17:6) Hence, this woman named Babylon
the Great clearly represents the world empire of false religion, which includes all religions that stand in opposition
to Jehovah God.

Was Jesus Born in December?
THE Bible does not tell us when Jesus was born. However,
it does give us sound reason to conclude that his birth did
not take place in December.
Appendix

283

Consider the weather conditions at that time of the year
in Bethlehem, where Jesus was born. The Jewish month of
Chislev (corresponding to November/December) was a
month with cold and rainy weather. The month after that
was Tebeth (December/January). It saw the lowest temperatures of the year, with occasional snows in the highlands. Let us see what the Bible tells us about the climate
of that region.
The Bible writer Ezra shows that Chislev was indeed a
month known for cold and rainy weather. After stating
that a crowd had gathered in Jerusalem “in the ninth
month [Chislev], on the 20th day of the month,” Ezra reports that people were “shivering . . . because of the heavy
rain.” Concerning weather conditions at that time of the
year, the congregated people themselves said: “It is the
rainy season. It is not possible to stand outside.” (Ezra 10:
9, 13; Jeremiah 36:22) No wonder shepherds living in that
part of the world made sure that they and their ?ocks were
no longer out of doors at night when December came
around!
The Bible reports, however, that shepherds were in the
?elds tending their ?ocks on the night of Jesus’ birth. In
fact, the Bible writer Luke shows that at that time, shepherds were “living out of doors and keeping watch in the
night over their ?ocks” near Bethlehem. (Luke 2:8-12) No284

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

tice that the shepherds were actually living out of doors,
not just strolling outside during the day. They had their
?ocks in the ?elds at night. Does that description of outdoor living ?t the chilly and rainy weather conditions of
Bethlehem in December? No, it does not. So the circumstances surrounding Jesus’ birth indicate that he was not
born in December.1
God’s Word tells us precisely when Jesus died, but it
gives little direct indication as to when he was born. This
brings to mind King Solomon’s words: “A good name is
better than good oil, and the day of death is better than
the day of birth.” (Ecclesiastes 7:1) It is not surprising,
then, that the Bible provides many details about Jesus’
ministry and death but few details about the time of his
birth.
1 For more information, see pages 176-179 of Reasoning From the
Scriptures, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Should We Celebrate Holidays?
THE Bible is not the source of popular religious and secular holidays that are celebrated in many parts of the
world today. What, then, is the origin of such celebrations?
If you have access to a library, you will ?nd it interesting
to note what reference books say about holidays that are
popular where you live. Consider a few examples.
Appendix

285

Easter. “There is no indication of the observance of the

Easter festival in the New Testament,” states The Encyclopædia Britannica. How did Easter get started? It is rooted
in pagan worship. While this holiday is supposed to commemorate Jesus’ resurrection, the customs associated with
the Easter season are not Christian. For instance, concerning the popular “Easter bunny,” The Catholic Encyclopedia
says: “The rabbit is a pagan symbol and has always been
an emblem of fertility.”
New Year’s Celebrations. The date and customs associated

with New Year’s celebrations vary from one country to another. Regarding the origin of this celebration, The World
Book Encyclopedia states: “The Roman ruler Julius Caesar
established January 1 as New Year’s Day in 46 B.C. The
Romans dedicated this day to Janus, the god of gates,
doors, and beginnings. The month of January was named
after Janus, who had two faces—one looking forward and
the other looking backward.” So New Year’s celebrations
are founded on pagan traditions.
Halloween. The Encyclopedia Americana says: “Elements

of the customs connected with Halloween can be traced
to a Druid [ancient Celtic priesthood] ceremony in preChristian times. The Celts had festivals for two major gods
—a sun god and a god of the dead . . . , whose festival was
held on November 1, the beginning of the Celtic New Year.
286

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

The festival of the dead was gradually incorporated into
Christian ritual.”
Other Holidays. It is not possible to discuss all the obser-

vances held throughout the world. However, holidays that
exalt humans or human organizations are not acceptable
to Jehovah. (Jeremiah 17:5-7; Acts 10:25, 26) Keep in mind,
too, that the origin of religious celebrations has a bearing
on whether they please God or not. (Isaiah 52:11; Revelation 18:4) The Bible principles mentioned in Chapter 16 of
this book will help you to determine how God views participation in holidays of a secular nature.

Appendix

287

For more information, visit www.jw.org
or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.

