What Does thGenesis 4:5-9e Obadiah Bible Obadiah 
ReGenesis 9:3-11:5ally Teach?
Large-PriGenesis4:6;  nt EdGen12ition Genesis 5:9 

s

bhObadiah lp-E
161025

Ask for a free Bible study.

What Does the Bible
Really Teach?
Large-Print Edition

THIS BOOK IS THE PROPERTY OF

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from
the modern-language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
What Does the Bible Really Teach?—Large Print
October 2016 Printing
English (bhlp-E)
5 2005, 2015
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
PUBLISHERS
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of
New York, Inc., Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

Is This What God Purposed?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

1. What Is the Truth About God?
2. The Bible—A Book From God

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

· · · ·Obadiah  · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

21
31

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

44

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

57

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

70

5. The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift
6. Where Are the Dead?

· · · · · · · · ·

82

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

95

7. Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died
8. What Is God’s Kingdom?

9. Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

11. Why Does God Allow Su?ering?

109

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

121

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

133

10. Spirit Creatures—How They A?ect Us

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

145

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

158

12. Living in a Way That Pleases God
13. A Godly View of Life

8

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

3. What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?
4. Who Is Jesus Christ?

4

14. How to Make Your Family Life Happy

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

170

15. Worship That God Approves

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

197

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

209

16. Take Your Stand for True Worship
17. Draw Close to God in Prayer

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

222

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

235

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

247

18. Baptism and Your Relationship With God
19. Remain in God’s Love
Appendix

184

Is This What God Purposed?
READ any newspaper. Look at television, or listen to the radio. There are so mObadiah any stories of
crime, war, and terrorism! Think about your own
troubles. Perhaps illness or the death of a loved
one is causing you great distress. You may feel like
the good man Job, who said that he was “?lled
with dishonor and a?iction.”—Job 10:15.
Ask yourself:
? Is this what God purposed for me and for the rest
of mankind?
? Where can I ?nd help to cope with my problems?
? Is there any hope that we will ever see peace on the
earth?
The Bible provides satisfying answers to these
questions.
4

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

THE BIBLE TEACHES THAT
GOD WILL BRING ABOUT
THESE CHANGES ON THE EARTH.
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes,
and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor
outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4
“The lame will leap like the deer.”
—Isaiah 35:6
“The eyes of the blind will be opened.”
—Isaiah 35:5
“All those in the memorial tombs will . . . come out.”
—John 5:28, 29
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ ”
—Isaiah 33:24
“There will be an abundance of grain on the earth.”
—Psalm 72:16

Is This What God Purposed?

5

BENEFIT FROM WHAT
THE BIBLE TEACHES
Do not quickly dismiss what is presented on the
preceding pages as mere wishful thinking. God has
promised to bring these things about, and the Bible
explains how he will do so.
But the Bible does more than that. It provides the
key to your enjoying a truly satisfying life even now.
Think for a moment about your own anxieties and
troubles. They may include money matters, family
problems, loss of health, or the death of a loved one.
The Bible can help you to deal with problems today,
and it can provide relief by answering such questions
as these:
?
?
?
?
?
?

Why do we su?er?
How can we cope with life’s anxieties?
How can we make our family life happier?
What happens to us when we die?
Will we ever see our dead loved ones again?
How can we be sure that God will ful?ll his promises for the
future?

The fact that you are reading this book shows that
you would like to ?nd out what the Bible teaches.
This book will help you. Notice thaObadiah t the paragraphs
have corresponding questions at the bottom of the
6

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

page. Millions have enjoyed using the question-andanswer method when discussing the Bible with
Jehovah’s Witnesses. We hope you will too. May you
have God’s blessing as you now enjoy the thrilling
and satisfying experience of learning what the Bible
really teaches!

GET TO KNOW YOUR BIBLE
THERE are 66 books and letters that make up the Bible. These are divided into chapters and verses for
easy reference. When scriptures are cited in this publication, the ?rst number after the name indicates the
chapter of the Bible book or letter, and the next refers
to the verse. For example, the citation “2 Timothy 3:
16” means the second letter to Timothy, chapter 3,
verse 16.
You will quickly become familiar with the Bible by
looking up the scriptures cited in this publication.
Also, why not start a program of daily Bible reading?
By reading three to ?ve chapters a day, you can read
the entire Bible in a year.

Is This What God Purposed?

7

CHAPTER ONE

What Is the Truth About God?
Does God really care about you?
What is God like? Does he have a name?
Is it possible to get close to God?
HAVE you ever noticed the way children ask questions? Many start asking as soon as they learn to
speak. With wide, eager eyes, they look up at you
and ask such things as: Why is the sky blue? What
are the stars made of? Who taught the birds to sing?
You may try hard to answer, but it is not always
easy. Even your best answer may lead to yet another question: Why?
2 Children are not the only ones who ask questions. As we grow up, we keep asking. We do this
in order to ?nd our way, to learn of dangers that we
need to avoid, or to satisfy our curiosity. But many
people seem to stop asking questions, especially the
most important ones. At least, they stop searching
for the answers.
1, 2. Why is it often good to ask questions?
8

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

3

Think about the question on the cover of this

book, the questions raised in the preface, or those
at the beginning of this chapter. These are some of
the most important questions you can ask. Yet,
many people have given up trying to ?nd the answers. Why? Does the Bible have the answers? Some
feel that its answers are too hard to understand.
Others worry that asking questions could lead to
shame or embarrassment. And some decide that
such questions are best left to religious leaders and
teachers. What about you?
4

Very likely you are interested in getting answers

to life’s big questions. No doubt you sometimes
wonder: ‘What is the purpose of life? Is this life all
there is? What is God really like?’ It is good to ask
such questions, and it is important that you do not
give up until you ?nd satisfying, reliable answers.
The famous teacher Jesus Christ said: “Keep on
asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking,
3. Why do many stop trying to ?nd answers to the questions that matter most?
4, 5. What are some of the most important questions we can ask in
life, and why should we seek the answers?
What Is the Truth About God?

9

and you will ?nd; keep on knocking, and it will be
opened to you.”—Matthew 7:7.
5

If you “keep on seeking” for answers to the im-

portant questions, you will ?nd that the search can
be very rewarding. (Proverbs 2:1-5) Despite what
other people may have told you, there are answers,
and you can ?nd them—in the Bible. The answers
are not too hard to understand. Better yet, they
bring hope and joy. And they can help you to live
a satisfying lGenesis 4: 16ife right now. To begin, let us consider
a question that has troubled many people.
IS G OD UNCARING AND HARDHEARTED?
6 Many people think that the answer to that ques-

tion is yes. ‘If God cared,’ they reason, ‘would not
the world be a very di?erent place?’ We look around
and see a world full of war, hatred, and misery. And
as individuals, we get sick, we su?er, we lose loved
ones in death. Thus, many say, ‘If God cared about
us and our problems, would he not prevent such
things from happening?’
6. Why do many people think that God is uncaring when it comes to
human su?ering?
10

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

7

Worse yet, religious teachers sometimes lead

people to think that God is hardhearted. How so?
When tragedy strikes, they say that it is God’s will.
In e?ect, such teachers blame God for the bad
things that happen. Is that the truth about God?
What does the Bible really teach? James 1:13 answers: “When under trial, let no one say: ‘I am being tried by God.’ For with evil things God___________ cannot
be tried,Genesis7:5, 6 nor does he himself try anyone.” So God
is never the source of the wickedness you see in the
world around you. (Read Job 34:10-12.) Granted, he
does allow bad things to happen. But there is a big
di?erence between allowing something to happen
and causing it.
8

For example, think about a wise and loving fa-

ther with a grown son who is still living at home
with his parents. When the son becomes rebellious
7. (a) How have religious teachers led many to think that God is hardhearted? (b) What does the Bible really teach about the trials we may
su?er?
8, 9. (a) How might you illustrate the di?erence between allowing
wickedness to exist and causing it? (b) Why would it be unfair for us
to ?nd fault with God’s decision to allow mankind to pursue a wayward
course?
What Is the Truth About God?

11

and decides to leave home, his father does not stop
him. The son pursues a bad way of life and gets into
trouble. Is the father the cause of his son’s problems? No. (Luke 15:11-13) Similarly, God has no__________t
stopped humans when they have chosen to pursue
a bad course, but he is not the cause of the problems that have resulted. Surely, then, it would be
unfair to blame God for all the troubles of mankind.
9

God has good reasons for allowing mankind to

follow a bad course. As our wise and powerful Creator, he does not have to explain his reasons to us.
Out of love, however, God does this. You will learn
more about these reasons in Chapter 11. But rest
assured that God is not responsible for the problems we face. On the contrary, he gives usObadiah 11-14 the only
hope for a solution!—Isaiah 33:2.
10

Furthermore, God is holy. (Isaiah 6:3) This

means that he is pure and clean. There is no trace
of badness in him. So we can trust him completely.
10. Why can we trust that God will undo all the e?ects of wickedness?
12

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

That is more than we can say for humans, who
sometimes become corrupt. Even the most honest
human in authority often does not have the power
to undo the damage that bad people do. But God
is all-powerful. He can and will undo all the e?ects
that wickedness has had on mankind. When God
acts, he will do so in a way that will end evil forever!—Read Psalm 37:9-11.

11

HOW D OES G OD FEEL AB OUT
INJUSTICES WE FACE?
In the meantime, how does God feel about

what is going on in the world and in your life? Well,
the Bible teaches that God “loves justice.” (Psalm
37:28) So he cares deeply about what is right and
what is wrong. He hates all kinds of injustice. The
Bible says that God’s “heart was saddened” when
badness ?lled the world in times past. () God has not changed. (Malachi 3:6) He still
hates to see the su?ering that is taking place worldwide. And God hates to see people su?er. “He cares
for you,” the Bible says.—Read 1 Peter 5:7.
11. (a) How does God feel about injustice? (b) How does God feel
about your su?ering?
What Is the Truth About God?

13

12

How can we be sure that God hates to see suf-

fering? Here is further proof. The Bible teaches that
man was made in the image of God. Genesis 1:26 
We thus have good qualities because God has good
qualities. For example, does it bother you to see innocent people su?er? If you care about such injustices, be assured that God feels even more strongly
about them.
13

One of the best things about humans is our

ability to love. That also re?ects God. The Bible
teaches that “God is love.” (1 John 4:8) We love because God loves. Would love move you to end the
su?ering and the injustice you see in the world? If
you had the power to do that, would you do it? Of
course you would! You can be just as sure that God
will end su?ering and injustice. The promises mentioned in the preface of this book are not mere
dreams or idle hopes. God’s promises are sure to
come true! In order to put faith in such promises,
12, 13. (a) Why do we have good qualities such as love, and how does
love a?ect our view of the world? (b) Why can you be sure that God
will really do something about world problems?
14

What Does the BibleGenesis7:1,2,5-9;10:4Really Teach?

thou__________gh, you need to know more about the God who
has made them.

14

G OD WANTS YOU TO KNOW
WHO HE IS
If you want someone to get to know you, what

might you do? Would you not tell the person your
name? Does God have a name? Many religions answer that his name is “God” or “Lord,” but those
are not personal names. They are titles, just as
“king” and “president” are titles. The Bible teaches
that God has many titles. “God” and “Lord” are
among them. However, the Bible also teaches that
God has a personal name: Jehovah. Psalm 83:18
says: “You, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are
the Most High over all the earth.” If your Bible
translation does not contain that name, you may
want to consult the Appendix on pages 248-251 of
this book to learn why that is so. The truth is that
God’s name appears thousands of times in ancient
Bible manuscripts. So Jehovah wants you to know
his name and to use it. In a sense, he is using the
Bible to introduce himself to you.
14. What is __________________God’s and why should we use it?
What Is the Truth About God?

15

God gave himself a name that is full of meaning. His name, Jehovah, means that God can ful?ll
any promise he makes and can carry out any purpose he has in mind.1 God’s name is unique, one of
a kind. It belongs only to him. In a number of ways,
Jehovah is unique. How is that so?
15

We saw that Psalm 83:18 said of Jehovah: “You
alone are the Most High.” Similarly, Jehovah alone
is referred to as “the Almighty.” Revelation 15:3
says: “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah
God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your
ways, King of eternity.” The title “the Almighty”
teaches us that Jehovah is the most powerful being
there is. His power is unmatched; it is supreme.
And the title “King of eternity” reminds us that Jehovah is unique in another sense. He alone has always existed. Psalm 90:2 says: “From everlasting to
everlasting, you are God.” That thought inspires
awe, does it not?
16

1 There is more information on the meaning and the pronunciation of God’s name in the Appendix on pages 248-251.

15. What does the name Jehovah mean?
16, 17. What may we learn about Jehovah from the following titles:
(a) “the Almighty”? (b) “King of eternity”? (c) “Creator”?
16

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jehovah is also unique in that he alone is the
Creator. Revelation 4:11 reads: “You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor
and the power, because you created all things, and
because of your will they came into existence and
were created.” Everything that you can think of
—from the invisible spirit creatures in heaven to
the stars that ?ll the night sky to the fruit that
grows on the trees to the ?sh that swim in the
oceans and rivers—all of it exists because Jehovah
is the Creator!
17

18

CAN YOU BE CLO SE TO JEHOVAH?
Reading about Jehovah’s awe-inspiring qualities

makes some people feel a little uneasy. They fear
that God is too high for them, that they could never get close to him or even matter to such a lofty
God. But is this idea correct? The Bible teaches just
the opposite. It says of Jehovah: “In fact, he is not
far o? from each one of us.” (Acts 17:27) The Bible
even urges us: “Draw close to God, and he will draw
close to you.”—James 4:8.
18. Why do some people feel that they could never get close to God,
but what does the Bible teach?
What Is the Truth About God?

17

How can you draw close to God? To begin with,
continue doing what you are doing now—learning
about God. Jesus said: “This means everlasting life,
their coming to know you, the only true God, and
the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.” (Obadiah17, 18)
Yes, the Bible teaches that learning about Jehovah
and Jesus leads to “everlasting life”! As already noted, “God is love.” (1 John 4:16) Jehovah also has
many other beautiful and appealing qualities. For
example, the Bible says that Jehovah is “a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth.” (Exodus 34:6) He is
“good and ready to forgive.” (Psalm 86:5) God is
patient. (2 Peter 3:9) He is loyal. (Revelation 15:4)
As you read more in the Bible, you will see how Jehovah has shown that he has these and many other
appealing qualities.
19

True, you cannot see God because he is an invisible Spirit. (John 1:18; 4:24; 1 Timothy 1:17) By
20

19. (a) How can we begin to draw close to God, and with what bene?t? (b) What qualities of God are most appealing to you?
20-22. (a) Does our inability to see God prevent us from getting close
to him? Explain. (b) What may some well-meaning people urge you to
do, but what should you do?
18

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

learning about him through the pages of the Bible,
however, you can come to know him as a Person.
As the psalmist said, you can “gaze upon the pleasantness of Jehovah.” (Psalm 27:4; Romans 1:20) The
more you learn about Jehovah, the more real he will
become to you and the more reason you will have
to love him and feel close to him.
You will come to understand why the Bible
teaches us to think of Jehovah as our Father. (Matthew 6:9) Not only does our life come from him but
he wants the best life possible for us—just as any
loving father would want for his children. (Psalm
36:9) The Bible also teaches that humans can become Jehovah’s friends. (James 2:23) Imagine—you
can become a friend of the Creator of the universe!
21

As you learn more from the Bible, you may ?nd
that some well-meaning people will urge you to
stop such studies. They may worry that you will
change your beliefs. But do not let anyone stop you
from forming the best friendship you can ever have.
22

23

Of course, there will be things that you do not

23, 24. (a) Why should you continue to ask questions about what you
are learning? (b) What is the subject of the next chapter?
What Is the Truth About God?

19

understand at ?rst. It can be a little humbling to
ask for help, but do not hold back because of embarrassment. Jesus said that it is good to be humble, like a little child. (Matthew 18:2-4) And children, as we know, ask a lot of questions. God wants
you to ?nd the answers. The Bible praises some who
were eager to learn about God. They checked carefully in the Scriptures to make sure that what they
were learning was the truth.—Read Acts 17:11.
24

The best way to learn about Jehovah is to ex-

amine the Bible. It is di?erent from any other book.
In what way? The next chapter will consider that
subject.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? God cares about you personally.—1 Peter 5:7.
? God’s personal name is Jehovah.
—Psalm 83:18.
? Jehovah invites you to draw close to him.
—James 4:8.
? Jehovah is loving and merciful.
—Exodus 34:6; 1 John 4:8, 16.
20

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER TWO

The Bible—A Book From God
In what ways is the Bible di?erent
from any other book?
How can the Bible help you cope
with personal problems?
Why can you trust the prophecies
recorded in the Bible?
CAN you recall a time when you received a ?ne gift
from a dear friend? Likely, the experience was not
only exciting but also heartwarming. After all, a gift
tells you something about the giver—that he or she
values your friendship. No doubt you expressed gratitude for your friend’s thoughtful gift.
The Bible is a gift from God, one for which we can
be truly grateful. This unique book reveals things
that we could never ?nd out otherwise. For example,
it tells us about the creation of the starry heavens, the
earth, and the ?rst man and woman. The Bible contains reliable principles to help us cope with life’s
2

1, 2. In what ways is the Bible an exciting gift from God?
The Bible—A Book From God

21

problems and anxieties. It explains how God will ful?ll his purpoas
held on November 1QUESTION 1
Who is God?
“May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.”
Psalm 83:18 [Page 819]
“Know that Jehovah is God. He is the one who made us, and we belong to him.”
Psalm 100:3 [Page 831]
“I am Jehovah. That is my name; I give my glory to no one else, nor my praise to graven images.”
Obadiah 21 [Page 993]
“Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”
Romans 10:13 [Page 1518]
“Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God.”
Hebrews 3:4 [Page 1602]
“Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number; he calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, not one of them is missing.”
Isaiah 40:26 [Page 990], the beginning of the Celtic New Year.
286

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

The festival of the dead was gradually incorporated into
Christian ritual.”
Other Holidays. It is not possible to discuss all the obser-

vances held throughout the world. However, holidays that
exalt humans or human organizations are not acceptable
to Jehovah. (Jeremiah 17:5-7; Acts 10:25, 26) Keep in mind,
too, that the origin of religious celebrations has a bearing
on whether they please God or not. (Isaiah 52:11; Revelation 18:4) The Bible principles mentioned in Chapter 16 of
this book will help you to determine how God views participation in holidays of a secular nature.

Appendix

287

For more information, visit www.jw.org
or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.





3 Jesus, the Son of God, set the highest value on God’s word, declaring, “Your word is truth.” To his followers he said: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 17:17; 8:31, 32) Powerful indeed is this word that Jesus received from his Father. It is God’s word. After his death and resurrection and his ascension to Jehovah’s own right hand in the heavens, Jesus made further revelation of his Father’s word, including a delightful description of God’s blessings for mankind in the Paradise earth. Following that, God instructed the apostle John: “Write, because these words are faithful and true.” All the words of the inspired Scriptures are “faithful and true,” bringing immeasurable benefits to those who heed them.—Rev. 21:5.
4 How do these benefits come about? The complete expression of the apostle Paul at 2 Timothy 3:16, 17 supplies the answer: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” The inspired Scriptures, then, are beneficial for teaching right doctrine and right conduct, setting things straight in our minds and lives, and reproving and disciplining us so that we may walk humbly in truth and righteousness. By submitting ourselves to the teaching of God’s Word, we may become “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9) There is no greater privilege on earth today than for one to be busy in God’s work as the ‘fully competent and completely equipped man of God.’
FIRM FOUNDATION FOR FAITH
5 For one to be a fellow worker with God, faith is needed. Faith is not to be confused with the watered-down credulity that is so prevalent today. Many people think that any kind of belief—sectarian, evolutionary, or philosophical—is sufficient. However, the man of God must “keep holding the pattern of healthful words . . . with the faith and love that are in connection with Christ Jesus.” (2 Tim. 1:13) His faith must be real and alive, for “faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities though not beheld.” It must be grounded in a firm belief in God and his rewards for those who please him. (Heb. 11:1, 6) This faith is to be obtained only through diligent study of God’s Word, the Bible. It is founded in deep love for the Bible and for the God of the Bible, Jehovah, and for his Son, Jesus Christ. There is only one such living faith, even as there is only one Lord, Jesus Christ, and one God and Father of all, Jehovah.—Eph. 4:5, 6.
6 We need to know what God’s Word is and where it came from as well as its authority and purpose and its power for righteousness. Gaining appreciation of its glorious message, we will have faith. Moreover, we shall come to love the Bible and its Author so fervently that nothing will ever be able to stifle that faith and love. It is the Scriptures, which include the sayings of Jesus Christ, that build a firm foundation for faith. True faith will be of the kind that will endure test and bitter trial, persecutions, and the materialistic advances and philosophies of a godless society. It will triumph gloriously right through into God’s new world of righteousness. “This is the conquest that has conquered the world, our faith.”—1 John 5:4.
7 In order to gain and hold on to faith, we need to apply ourselves to building love and appreciation for God’s Word, the inspired Scriptures. The Scriptures are God’s incomparable gift to mankind, a storehouse of spiritual treasures whose depth of wisdom is unfathomable and whose power for enlightening and stimulating to righteousness exceeds that of all other books ever written. As we dig down to gain knowledge of God’s Word, we will be led to exclaim with the apostle Paul: “O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge!” To know the inspired Scriptures and their Author is to enter into the pathway of eternal joy and pleasantness.—Rom. 11:33; Ps. 16:11.
JEHOVAH—A COMMUNICATING GOD
8 In speaking of the glory of Jehovah’s name, David exclaimed: “You are great and are doing wondrous things; you are God, you alone.” (Ps. 86:10) Jehovah has done many “wondrous things” for mankind on earth, and among these is the communicating of his Word to them. Yes, Jehovah is a communicating God, a God who lovingly expresses himself for the benefit of his creatures. How thankful we should be that our Creator is no aloof potentate, shrouded in mysteries and unresponsive to the needs of lovers of righteousness on earth! As he will also do in the new world to come, Jehovah resides even now with those who exercise faith and love toward him, in the relation of a kind Father communicating good things to his inquiring children. (Rev. 21:3) Our heavenly Father is not like the demon gods, who must be represented by fearsome dumb idols. Gods of metal and stone have no fatherly relationship with their benighted worshipers. They can communicate nothing of benefit to them. Truly, “those making them will become just like them.”—Ps. 135:15-19; 1 Cor. 8:4-6.
9 Jehovah is the “God merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness and truth.” (Ex. 34:6) Out of the abundance of his loving-kindness, he has communicated an abundance of truth to mankind. This is all sound counsel for the guidance of mankind and includes prophecy to lighten one’s paths to future blessings. “For all the things that were written aforetime were written for our instruction, that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.” (Rom. 15:4) Out of the realms above, from heaven itself, has come reliable communication to instruct mankind, who are in the realms below.—John 8:23.
10 Jehovah has never communicated in an unknown tongue but always in the language of mankind, the living tongue of his faithful witnesses. (Acts 2:5-11) To Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and the Hebrew prophets, Jehovah spoke in mankind’s first language, now known as Hebrew. Hebrew continued to be used for as long as it could be understood, even as late as the time of Saul of Tarsus, to whom the resurrected Jesus spoke in that language. (Acts 26:14) When the Aramaic language of the Chaldeans took hold among the Israelites in exile, some communications then came from God in Aramaic, for the people understood that language. (Ezra 4:8–6:18; 7:12-26; Dan. 2:4b–7:28) Later, when Greek was the international language and the principal language of his witnesses, Jehovah’s communications were made and preserved in that tongue. The sayings preserved in the Bible are Jehovah’s communication, spoken always in a living tongue for the benefit of humble, truth-loving men on earth.
11 Jehovah is the Creator of the mind and of the speech organs, including the tongue, mouth, and throat, which form all the intricacies of speech sounds for each of the many systems of language. Thus, it may be said that Jehovah is the Former of all language. His authority over the language of mankind was demonstrated by his miracle performed at the Tower of Babel. (Ex. 4:11; Gen. 11:6-9; 10:5; 1 Cor. 13:1) No language is strange to Jehovah. Not only did he give man the original Hebrew language but, by his creation of the mind and the speech organs, he also provided the basis for Aramaic and Greek and for all of the some 3,000 languages now being spoken by mankind.
THE LANGUAGE OF TRUTH
12 Regardless of the system of human language used by Jehovah, in all instances he has communicated in the language of truth, not in religious mysticisms. It is a language simple and easy to understand. (Zeph. 3:9) Earthly man can easily understand three-dimensional matters, that is, objects that have height, breadth, and length and that are set in the stream of time. Therefore, Jehovah has represented invisible things by using typical representations that the mind of man can comprehend. As an example, there was the tabernacle designed by God and erected by Moses in the wilderness. Under inspiration Paul used its three-dimensional symbols to explain glorious realities that are of heaven itself.—Heb. 8:5; 9:9.
13 Another example: Jehovah, who is spirit, does not literally sit on a thronelike chair in heaven. However, to us mere men, bound by visible realities, God expresses himself by using such a visible symbol to convey understanding. When he commences heavenly court proceedings, it is just as when a king on earth begins proceedings by taking his seat on a throne.—Dan. 7:9-14.
EASILY TRANSLATED
14 Since the Bible has been written in these down-to-earth, easily understandable terms, it is possible to translate its symbols and actions clearly and accurately into most modern-day languages. The original power and force of truth are preserved in all translations. Simple everyday words, such as “horse,” “war,” “crown,” “throne,” “husband,” “wife,” and “children,” communicate accurate thought clearly in every language. This is in contrast with human philosophical writings, which often do not lend themselves to accurate translation. Their complicated expressions and up-in-the-air terminology often cannot be conveyed precisely in another tongue.
15 The Bible’s power of expression is far superior. Even when God communicated judgment messages to nonbelievers, he did not use philosophical language but, rather, everyday symbols. This is shown at Daniel 4:10-12. Here the kingdom of the self-glorifying pagan king was described in some detail under the symbol of a tree, and then, by means of actions involving this tree, future happenings were accurately foretold. All of this is clearly conveyed in translations into other languages. Jehovah has lovingly made communications in this way in order that “the true knowledge will become abundant.” How wonderfully this has aided in the understanding of prophecy in this “time of the end”!—Dan. 12:4.
LINE OF COMMUNICATION
16 Someone may ask, What has been the means of communication? This may well be illustrated by a modern-day example. Communications lines have (1) the utterer, or originator, of the message; (2) the transmitter; (3) the medium through which the message passes; (4) the receiver; and (5) the hearer. In telephone communications we have (1) the telephone user originating the communication; (2) the telephone transmitter, which converts the message into electrical impulses; (3) the telephone lines carrying the electrical impulses to the destination; (4) the receiver reconverting the message from impulses to sounds; and (5) the hearer. Likewise in heaven (1) Jehovah God originates his utterances; (2) then his official Word, or Spokesman—now known as Jesus Christ—often transmits the message; (3) God’s holy spirit, the active force that is used as the medium of communication, carries it earthward; (4) God’s prophet on earth receives the message; and (5) he then publishes it for the benefit of God’s people. Just as on occasion today a courier may be sent to deliver an important message, so Jehovah at times chose to use spirit messengers, or angels, to carry some communications from the heavens to his servants on the earth.—Gal. 3:19; Heb. 2:2.
PROCESS OF INSPIRATION
17 The expression “inspired of God” is translated from the Greek the·o'pneu·stos, meaning “God-breathed.” (See 2 Timothy 3:16, first footnote.) It is God’s own spirit, his active force, that he has ‘breathed’ on faithful men, causing them to compile and write the Sacred Scriptures. This process is known as inspiration. The prophets and other faithful servants of Jehovah who became subject to inspiration had their minds borne along by means of this active force. This means that they received messages, including pictures of purpose, from God and that these became firmly fixed in the circuits of their minds. “For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.”—2 Pet. 1:21; John 20:21, 22.
18 While these men of God were awake and fully conscious or while they were asleep in a dream, his spirit firmly implanted the message emanating from the divine origin of the line of communication. Upon receiving the message, the prophet had the responsibility of relaying it in word form to others. When Moses and other faithful prophets return in the resurrection, they will no doubt be able to confirm the accuracy of the preserved records of their writings, for their appreciative re-created minds will likely still hold the original communications clearly in memory. In like manner, the apostle Peter was so deeply impressed by the vision of the transfiguration that he could write vividly concerning its magnificence more than 30 years later.—Matt. 17:1-9; 2 Pet. 1:16-21.
THE AUTHOR AND HIS FINGER
19 Human authors have used fingers to write, in ancient times by means of a pen or stylus and in modern times by means of a pen, typewriter, or computer. What has been produced through these fingers is said to have been authored by the mind of their owner. Did you know that God has a finger? This is so, for Jesus spoke of God’s spirit as His “finger.” When Jesus cured a demon-possessed man so that he regained his power of speech and his sight, religious foes blasphemed the means by which Jesus had cured the man. According to Matthew, Jesus said to them: “If it is by means of God’s spirit that I expel the demons, the kingdom of God has really overtaken you.” (Matt. 12:22, 28) Luke adds to our understanding by quoting Jesus as saying on a like occasion: “If it is by means of God’s finger I expel the demons, the kingdom of God has really overtaken you.” (Luke 11:20) On an earlier occasion, the magic-practicing priests of Egypt were forced to admit that the plagues on Egypt were an exhibition of Jehovah’s superior power, acknowledging: “It is the finger of God!”—Ex. 8:18, 19.
20 In harmony with these uses of the word “finger,” it can be appreciated that “God’s finger” has great power and that this designation well applies to his spirit as he used it in the writing of the Bible. So the Scriptures inform us that by means of “God’s finger,” he wrote the Ten Commandments on the two tablets of stone. (Ex. 31:18; Deut. 9:10) When God used men to write the various books of the Holy Bible, his symbolic finger, or spirit, was likewise the directive force behind the pen of those men. God’s holy spirit is unseen, but it has been active in a marvelous way, with the visible, tangible result that mankind has received the treasured gift of God’s Word of truth, His Bible. There is no question that the Bible’s Author is Jehovah God, the heavenly Communicator.
THE INSPIRED COLLECTION BEGINS
21 As has been seen, Jehovah “proceeded to give Moses two tablets of the Testimony, tablets of stone written on by God’s finger.” (Ex. 31:18) This writing comprised the Ten Commandments, and it is of interest that this document officially presents the divine name, Jehovah, eight times. In the same year, 1513 B.C.E., Jehovah commanded Moses to start making permanent records. So began the writing of the Sacred Scriptures. (Ex. 17:14; 34:27) God also commanded Moses to construct “the ark of the testimony,” or “the ark of the covenant,” a chest of beautiful workmanship in which the Israelites were to preserve this most treasured communication. (Ex. 25:10-22; 1 Ki. 8:6, 9) The design of the Ark, and of the tabernacle that housed it, was supplied by Jehovah; and the chief artisan and builder, Bezalel, was filled “with the spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding and in knowledge and in every sort of craftsmanship” in order to complete his work according to the divine pattern.—Ex. 35:30-35.
22 In making known his purposes, God “spoke on many occasions and in many ways” over a long period of time. (Heb. 1:1) The penmen who wrote down his Word did so from 1513 B.C.E. to about 98 C.E., or during about 1,610 years. The one Author, Jehovah God, used about 40 of these scribes, or human secretaries. All these cowriters were Hebrews and thus members of the nation “entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God.” (Rom. 3:2) Eight of them were Christian Jews who knew Jesus either personally or through his apostles. The inspired Scriptures written before their time had borne witness concerning the coming of the Messiah, or Christ. (1 Pet. 1:10, 11) Although called from many walks of life, these earthly Bible writers, from Moses to the apostle John, all shared in upholding the sovereignty of Jehovah God and proclaiming his purposes in the earth. They wrote in Jehovah’s name and by the power of his spirit.—Jer. 2:2, 4; Ezek. 6:3; 2 Sam. 23:2; Acts 1:16; Rev. 1:10.
23 Several of these writers include in their records compilations from eyewitness documents made by earlier writers, not all of whom were inspired. Moses, for example, may have compiled parts of Genesis from such eyewitness accounts, as Samuel may have done in writing the book of Judges. Jeremiah compiled First and Second Kings, and Ezra wrote First and Second Chronicles, largely in this way. The holy spirit guided these compilers in determining which portions of older human documents should be incorporated, thus authenticating these compilations as being reliable. From the time of their compilation forward, these extracts from older documents became part of the inspired Scriptures.—Gen. 2:4; 5:1; 2 Ki. 1:18; 2 Chron. 16:11.
24 In what order did the 66 Bible books come to us? What part of the endless stream of time do they cover? After describing the creation of the heavens and the earth and the preparation of the earth as man’s home, the Genesis account takes up the beginnings of human history from the creation of the first man in 4026 B.C.E. The Sacred Writings then narrate important events down until shortly after 443 B.C.E. Then, after a gap of more than 400 years, they pick up the account again in 3 B.C.E., taking it on to about 98 C.E. Thus, from a historical viewpoint, the Scriptures span a period of 4,123 years.
25 The chart on page 12 will assist in the understanding of the background of the Bible writers and the sequence in which the Bible writings came to us.
THE COMPLETE “BOOK” OF DIVINE TRUTH
26 The Sacred Scriptures, as a collection from Genesis to Revelation, form one complete book, one complete library, all inspired by the one Supreme Author. They should not be divided into two parts, so that one part is given less value. The Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures are essential to each other. The latter supplements the former to make the one complete book of divine truth. The 66 Bible books, all together, form the one library of the Holy Scriptures.—Rom. 15:4.
27 It is a mistake of tradition to divide God’s written Word into two sections, calling the first section, from Genesis to Malachi, the “Old Testament,” and the second section, from Matthew to Revelation, the “New Testament.” At 2 Corinthians 3:14 the popular King James Version tells of the “reading of the old testament,” but here the apostle is not referring to the ancient Hebrew Scriptures in their entirety. Nor does he mean that the inspired Christian writings constitute a “new testament [covenant].” The apostle is speaking of the Law covenant, which was recorded by Moses in the Pentateuch and which makes up only a part of the pre-Christian Scriptures. For this reason he says in the next verse, “when Moses is read.” The Greek word rendered “testament” in the King James Version has uniformly been rendered “covenant” in many modern translations.—Matt. 26:28; 2 Cor. 3:6, 14, New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, Revised Standard Version, American Standard Version.
28 That which has been recorded and preserved as the Holy Scriptures is not to be tampered with. (Deut. 4:1, 2; Rev. 22:18, 19) The apostle Paul writes on this point: “However, even if we or an angel out of heaven were to declare to you as good news something beyond what we declared to you as good news, let him be accursed.” (Gal. 1:8; see also John 10:35.) All of Jehovah’s word of prophecy must be fulfilled in due course. “So my word that goes forth from my mouth will prove to be. It will not return to me without results, but it will certainly do that in which I have delighted, and it will have certain success in that for which I have sent it.”—Isa. 55:11.
EXAMINING THE SCRIPTURES
29 In the following pages, the 66 books of the Sacred Scriptures are examined in turn. The setting of each book is described, and information is given concerning the writer, the time of writing, and in some cases the period covered. Proof is also presented to show that the book is authentic and that it rightly belongs as part of the inspired Scriptures. This proof may be found in the words of Jesus Christ or in the inspired writings of other servants of God. Very often the authenticity of the book is shown by undeniable fulfillments of Bible prophecy or by internal evidence from the book itself, such as its harmony, honesty, and candor. Supporting evidence may be taken from archaeological finds or reliable secular history.
30 As the contents of each book are described, the endeavor is to make the powerful message of the Bible writer stand out in such a way as to instill in the heart of the reader a deep love for the inspired Scriptures and their Author, Jehovah God, and thus to enhance appreciation for the living message of God’s Word with all its practicalness, harmony, and beauty. The contents of the book are set out under paragraph subheadings. This is for convenience in study and does not mean that these are arbitrary subdivisions for the books of the Bible. Each book is in itself an entity, making a valuable contribution to the understanding of the divine purposes.
31 In concluding each book, the discussion points out why this portion of the inspired Scriptures is “beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2 Tim. 3:16) The fulfillments of prophecy, where these are indicated by the inspired testimony of later Bible writers, are considered. In each instance, the book’s contribution to developing the overall theme of the Bible is shown. The Bible is no myth. It contains the only living message for mankind. From the first book, Genesis, to the last book, Revelation, the inspired Scriptures testify to the purpose of the Creator of the universe, Jehovah God, to sanctify his name by the Kingdom ruled by his Seed. Therein lies the glorious hope for all lovers of righteousness.—Matt. 12:18, 21.
32 After considering the 66 Bible books themselves, we devote some space to giving background information on the Bible. This includes studies on the geography of the Promised Land, the timing of the events of the Bible, Bible translations, archaeological and other supporting evidences of the authenticity of the Bible, and proof of the Bible catalog. Other valuable information and tables also appear in this section. All of this is designed to heighten appreciation for the Bible as the most practical and beneficial book on earth today.
33 The divine Author has spoken to mankind at great length. He has shown great depth of love and fatherly interest in what he has done for his children on earth. What a remarkable collection of inspired documents he has provided for us in the Holy Scriptures! Truly, these form a treasure beyond compare, an extensive library of ‘divinely breathed’ information, far exceeding in wealth and in scope the writings of mere men. Devotion to the study of God’s Word will not become “wearisome to the flesh,” but, rather, it will bring eternal benefits to those knowing “the saying of Jehovah [that] endures forever.”—Eccl. 12:12; 1 Pet. 1:24, 25.
[Study Questions]
 1. How does the Bible identify its Author, and what kind of knowledge do the Scriptures provide?
 2. How did Moses, David, and Solomon evaluate godly wisdom?
 3. What value do Jesus and God himself place on the divine word?
 4. For what are the inspired Scriptures beneficial?
 5. What is faith, and how only may it be obtained?
 6. True faith is of what quality?
 7. What rewards come with the finding of Bible wisdom?
 8. (a) Why should we be thankful that Jehovah is a communicating God? (b) In what way does he contrast with the demon gods?
 9. What kind of communication has come from God in the realms above?
10. In what tongues has Jehovah made communication, and why?
11. Why may it be said that Jehovah is the Former of all language?
12, 13. (a) How has Jehovah made his communications easy to understand? (b) Give examples.
14, 15. Why is the Bible, in contrast with human philosophical writings, easily translatable into other tongues? Illustrate.
16. How may Jehovah’s channel of communication be outlined?
17. What Greek word is translated “inspired of God,” and how does its meaning help us to understand the process of inspiration?
18. How deeply were the inspired messages impressed on their human receivers?
19. What is God’s “finger,” as proved by what scriptures?
20. How has God’s “finger” operated, and with what result?
21. (a) How did the writing of the Scriptures commence? (b) In what way did Jehovah provide for their preservation?
22. (a) Who is the Author of the inspired Scriptures, and how long did the writing take? (b) Who were the cowriters of the Bible, and what is known about them?
23. What earlier records did some Bible writers use, and how did these become inspired Scripture?
24, 25. (a) What period of history is covered in the Bible? (b) Point out some interesting facts found in the chart on page 12.
26. In what way are the Scriptures one complete book?
27. Why are the expressions “Old Testament” and “New Testament” misnomers?
28. What assurance is given as to Bible prophecies?
29. In this book, as each Bible book is examined in turn, what introductory information is provided?
30. In what way are the contents of each Bible book presented?
31. (a) What information is presented to show why each book is beneficial? (b) What glorious theme is kept to the fore throughout the discussions of Bible books?
32. What information is provided to heighten appreciation for the Bible?
33. How might the Bible be described, and of what benefit is a study of it?
[Chart on page 12]
THE BIBLE’S INSPIRED PENMEN AND THEIR WRITINGS
              (In Date Order)
Order Writers  Occupations   Writings          Writings
                               Completed
 1.  Moses     Scholar,     1473 B.C.E.      Genesis; Exodus;
                shepherd,                     Leviticus; Job;
                prophet,                      Numbers;
                leader                        Deuteronomy;
                                              Psalm 90
                                              (possibly also 91)
 2.  Joshua    Leader       c. 1450 B.C.E.   Joshua
 3.  Samuel    Levite,      before           Judges; Ruth;
                prophet      c. 1080 B.C.E.   part of First
                                              Samuel
 4.  Gad       Prophet      c. 1040 B.C.E.   Part of First
                                              Samuel; Second
                                              Samuel (both with
                                              Nathan)
 5.  Nathan    Prophet      c. 1040 B.C.E.   See above (with Gad)
 6.  David     King,        1037 B.C.E.      Many of the Psalms
                shepherd,
                musician
 7.  Sons of                                 Some of the Psalms
      Korah
 8.  Asaph     Singer                        Some of the Psalms
 9.  Heman     Wise man                      Psalm 88
10.  Ethan     Wise man                      Psalm 89
11.  Solomon   King,        c. 1000 B.C.E.   Most of Proverbs;
                builder,                      The Song of Solomon;
                wise man                      Ecclesiastes;
                                              Psalm 127
12.  Agur                                    Proverbs chapter 30
13.  Lemuel    King                          Proverbs chapter 31
14.  Jonah     Prophet      c. 844 B.C.E.    Jonah
15.  Joel      Prophet      c. 820 B.C.E.(?) Joel
16.  Amos      Herdsman,    c. 804 B.C.E.    Amos
                prophet
17.  Hosea     Prophet      after 745 B.C.E. Hosea
18.  Isaiah    Prophet      after 732 B.C.E. Isaiah
19.  Micah     Prophet      before           Micah
                             717 B.C.E.
20.  Zephaniah Prince,      before           Zephaniah
                prophet      648 B.C.E.
21.  Nahum     Prophet      before           Nahum
                             632 B.C.E.
22.  Habakkuk  Prophet      c. 628 B.C.E.(?) Habakkuk
23.  Obadiah   Prophet      c. 607 B.C.E.    Obadiah
24.  Ezekiel   Priest,      c. 591 B.C.E.    Ezekiel
                prophet
25.  Jeremiah  Priest,      580 B.C.E.       First and Second
                prophet                       Kings; Jeremiah;
                                              Lamentations
26.  Daniel    Prince,      c. 536 B.C.E.    Daniel
                ruler,
                prophet
27.  Haggai    Prophet      520 B.C.E.       Haggai
28.  Zechariah Prophet      518 B.C.E.       Zechariah
29.  Mordecai  Prime        c. 475 B.C.E.    Esther
                minister
30.  Ezra      Priest,      c. 460 B.C.E.    First and Second
                copyist,                      Chronicles; Ezra
                administrator
31.  Nehemiah  Court        after 443 B.C.E. Nehemiah
                official,
                governor
32.  Malachi   Prophet      after 443 B.C.E. Malachi
33.  Matthew   Tax          c. 41 C.E.       Matthew
                collector,
                apostle
34.  Luke      Physician,   c. 61 C.E.       Luke; Acts
                missionary
35.  James     Overseer     before 62 C.E.   James
                (brother
                of Jesus)
36.  Mark      Missionary   c. 60-65 C.E.    Mark
37.  Peter     Fisherman,   c. 64 C.E.       First and Second
                apostle                       Peter
38.  Paul      Missionary,  c. 65 C.E.       First and Second
                apostle,                      Thessalonians;
                tentmaker                     Galatians; First
                                              and Second
                                              Corinthians;
                                              Romans; Ephesians;
                                              Philippians;
                                              Colossians;
                                              Philemon; Hebrews;
                                              First and Second
                                              Timothy; Titus
39.  Jude      Disciple     c. 65 C.E.       Jude
                (brother
                of Jesus)
40.  John      Fisherman,   c. 98 C.E.       Revelation; John;
                apostle                       First, Second, and
                                              Third John
Bible Book Number 1—Genesis
Writer: Moses
Place Written: Wilderness
Writing Completed: 1513 B.C.E.
Time Covered: “In the beginning” to 1657 B.C.E.
IMAGINE picking up a book of only 50 short chapters and finding in the first page or two the only accurate account of the earliest history of man and a record showing the relationship of man to God, his Creator, as well as to the earth with its myriads of creatures! In those few pages, you gain, too, a deep insight into God’s purpose in putting man on earth. Reading a little farther, you discover why man dies and the reason for his present troubled condition, and you are enlightened regarding the real basis for faith and for hope, even regarding identifying God’s instrument for deliverance—the Seed of promise. The remarkable book that contains all these things is Genesis, the first of the 66 books of the Bible.
2 “Genesis” means “Origin; Birth,” the name being taken from the Greek Septuagint translation of the book. In the Hebrew manuscripts, the title is the opening word, Bere'·shith', “in the beginning” (Greek, en ar·khei'). Genesis is the first book of the Pentateuch (an Anglicized Greek word meaning “five rolls” or “fivefold volume”). Evidently this was originally one book called the Torah (Law) or “the book of the law of Moses” but was later divided into the five rolls for easier handling.—Josh. 23:6; Ezra 6:18.
3 Jehovah God is the Author of the Bible, but he inspired Moses to write the book of Genesis. From where did Moses get the information he recorded in Genesis? Some could have been received directly by divine revelation and some, under the direction of holy spirit, through oral transmission. It is also possible that Moses possessed written documents preserved by his forefathers as precious, valuable records of the origins of mankind.
4 It was possibly in the wilderness of Sinai in 1513 B.C.E. that Moses, under inspiration, completed his writing. (2 Tim. 3:16; John 5:39, 46, 47) Where did Moses obtain the information for the last part of Genesis? Since his great-grandfather Levi was the half brother of Joseph, these details would be accurately known within his own family. Levi’s life may even have overlapped that of Moses’ father, Amram. Further, Jehovah’s spirit would again assure the correct recording of this portion of the Scriptures.—Ex. 6:16, 18, 20; Num. 26:59.
5 There is no question as to who wrote Genesis. “The book of the law of Moses” and similar references to the first five books of the Bible, of which Genesis is one, are to be found often from the time of Moses’ successor, Joshua, onward. In fact, there are some 200 references to Moses in 27 of the later Bible books. Moses’ writership has never been questioned by the Jews. The Christian Greek Scriptures make frequent mention of Moses as the writer of “the law,” the crowning testimony being that of Jesus Christ. Moses wrote at Jehovah’s direct command and under His inspiration.—Ex. 17:14; 34:27; Josh. 8:31; Dan. 9:13; Luke 24:27, 44.
6 Some skeptics have asked, But how were Moses and his predecessors able to write? Was not writing a later human development? Writing evidently had its start early in human history, perhaps before the Deluge of Noah’s day, which occurred in 2370 B.C.E. Is there any evidence of man’s early ability to write? While it is true that archaeologists have assigned dates earlier than 2370 B.C.E. to certain clay tablets that they have excavated, such dates are merely conjectural. However, it should be noted that the Bible clearly shows that the building of cities, the development of musical instruments, and the forging of metal tools had their start long before the Deluge. (Gen. 4:17, 21, 22) Reasonably, then, men would have had little difficulty in developing a method of writing.
7 In many other respects, Genesis has proved to be amazingly consistent with proved facts. It is only Genesis that gives a true and factual account of the Flood and its survivors, though accounts of a deluge and survival by humans (in many cases as a result of being preserved in a vessel) are found in the legends of many branches of the human family. The Genesis account also locates the beginnings of the dwellings of the different branches of mankind, stemming from the three sons of Noah—Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Says Dr. Melvin G. Kyle, of Xenia Theological Seminary, Missouri, U.S.A.: “That from a central point, somewhere in Mesopotamia, the Hamitic branch of the race migrated to the south-west, the Japhetic branch to the north-west, and the Semitic branch ‘eastward’ toward the ‘land of Shinar’ is indisputable.”
8 The authenticity of Genesis as part of the divine record is shown also by its internal harmony, as well as by its complete agreement with the remainder of the inspired Scriptures. Its candor reflects a writer who feared Jehovah and loved truth and who unhesitatingly wrote of the sins of both the nation and those prominent in Israel. Above all, the unswerving accuracy with which its prophecies have come to fulfillment, as will be shown toward the end of this chapter, marks Genesis as an outstanding example of a writing inspired by Jehovah God.—Gen. 9:20-23; 37:18-35; Gal. 3:8, 16.
CONTENTS OF GENESIS
9 Creation of the heavens and the earth, and the preparation of the earth for human habitation (1:1–2:25). Reaching back evidently through billions of years of time, Genesis opens with impressive simplicity: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” Significantly, this opening sentence identifies God as the Creator and his material creation as the heavens and the earth. In majestic, well-chosen words, the first chapter continues on to give a general account of the creative work relative to the earth. This is accomplished in six time periods called days, each beginning with an evening, when the creative work for that period is undefined, and ending in the brightness of a morning, as the glory of the creative work becomes clearly manifest. On successive “days” appear the light; the expanse of the atmosphere; dry land and vegetation; the luminaries to divide day and night; fish and fowl; and land animals and finally man. God here makes known his law governing kinds, the impassable barrier making it impossible for one kind to evolve into another. Having made man in His own image, God announces His threefold purpose for man on earth: to fill it with righteous offspring, to subdue it, and to have in subjection the animal creation. The seventh “day” is blessed and pronounced sacred by Jehovah, who now proceeds ‘to rest from all his work that he has made.’ The account next gives a close-up, or magnified view, of God’s creative work as regards man. It describes the garden of Eden and its location, states God’s law of the forbidden tree, relates Adam’s naming of the animals, and then gives the account of Jehovah’s arranging the first marriage by forming a wife from Adam’s own body and bringing her to Adam.
10 Sin and death enter the world; “seed” foretold as deliverer (3:1–5:5). The woman eats the forbidden fruit and persuades her husband to join her in rebellion, and so Eden becomes defiled through disobedience. God immediately points to the means by which his purpose will be accomplished: “And Jehovah God proceeded to say to the serpent [Satan, the invisible instigator of the rebellion]: ‘ . . . And I shall put enmity between you and the woman and between your seed and her seed. He will bruise you in the head and you will bruise him in the heel.’” (3:14, 15) Man is expelled from the garden, to live in pain and sweatful toil among thorns and thistles. Finally, he must die and return to the ground from which he had been taken. Only his offspring may hope in the promised Seed.
11 The ravages of sin continue outside Eden. Cain, the first man-child born, becomes the murderer of his brother Abel, a faithful servant of Jehovah. Jehovah banishes Cain to the land of Fugitiveness, where he brings forth offspring later wiped out by the Deluge. Adam now has another son, Seth, who becomes father to Enosh; at this time men begin to call on the name of Jehovah in hypocrisy. Adam dies at 930 years of age.
12 Wicked men and angels ruin the earth; God brings the Deluge (5:6–11:9). The genealogy through Seth is here given. Outstanding among these descendants of Seth is Enoch, who sanctifies Jehovah’s name by “walking with the true God.” (5:22) The next man of notable faith is Enoch’s great-grandson Noah, born 1,056 years after Adam’s creation. During this time something occurs to increase the violence in the earth. Angels of God forsake their heavenly habitation to marry the good-looking daughters of men. This unauthorized cohabitation produces a hybrid race of giants known as the Nephilim (meaning “Fellers”), who make a name, not for God, but for themselves. Jehovah therefore announces to Noah that He is going to wipe out man and beast because of the continuing badness of mankind. Only Noah finds favor with Jehovah.
13 Noah becomes father to Shem, Ham, and Japheth. As violence and ruination continue in the earth, Jehovah reveals to Noah that He is about to sanctify His name by means of a great flood, and He commands Noah to build an ark of preservation, giving him detailed building plans. Noah promptly obeys and gathers his family of eight persons, together with beasts and birds; then, in the 600th year of his life (2370 B.C.E.), the Flood begins. The downpour continues for 40 days, until even the tall mountains are covered by as much as 15 cubits (c. 22 ft) of water. When, after one year, Noah is finally able to lead his family out of the ark, his first act is to offer a great sacrifice of thanksgiving to Jehovah.
14 Jehovah now blesses Noah and his family and commands them to fill the earth with their offspring. God’s decree gives permission to eat meat but demands abstinence from blood, which is the soul, or life, of the flesh, and requires the execution of a murderer. God’s covenant nevermore to bring a deluge upon the earth is confirmed by the appearance of the rainbow in the heavens. Later, Ham shows disrespect for Jehovah’s prophet Noah. Learning of this, Noah curses Ham’s son Canaan, but he adds a blessing showing that Shem will be specially favored and that Japheth also will be blessed. Noah dies at 950 years of age.
15 Noah’s three sons carry out God’s command to multiply, producing 70 families, the progenitors of the present human race. Nimrod, grandson of Ham, is not counted in, evidently because he becomes “a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.” (10:9) He sets up a kingdom and starts to build cities. At this time all the earth has one language. Instead of scattering over the earth to populate and cultivate it, men decide to build a city and a tower with its top in the heavens so that they can make a celebrated name for themselves. However, Jehovah thwarts their intention by confusing their language, and so scatters them. The city is called Babel (meaning “Confusion”).
16 God’s dealings with Abraham (11:10–25:26). The important line of descent from Shem to Terah’s son Abram is traced, supplying also the chronological links. Instead of seeking a name for himself, Abram exercises faith in God. He leaves the Chaldean city of Ur at God’s command and, at 75 years of age, crosses the Euphrates on his way to the land of Canaan, calling on the name of Jehovah. Because of his faith and obedience, he comes to be called “Jehovah’s friend [lover],” and God establishes his covenant with him. (Jas. 2:23; 2 Chron. 20:7; Isa. 41:8) God protects Abram and his wife during a brief stay in Egypt. Back in Canaan, Abram shows his generosity and peaceableness by allowing his nephew and fellow worshiper, Lot, to select the best part of the land. Later, he rescues Lot from four kings who have captured him. Then, returning from the fight, Abram meets Melchizedek, king of Salem, who as priest of God blesses Abram, and to whom Abram pays tithes.
17 God later appears to Abram, announcing that He is Abram’s shield and enlarging on the covenant promise by revealing that Abram’s seed will become as the stars of heaven for number. Abram is told that his seed will suffer affliction for 400 years but will be delivered by God, with judgment upon the afflicting nation. When Abram is 85 years old, Sarai his wife, still childless, gives him her Egyptian maidservant Hagar that he may have a child by her. Ishmael is born and is viewed as the possible heir. However, Jehovah purposes differently. When Abram is 99 years old, Jehovah changes his name to Abraham, changes Sarai’s name to Sarah, and promises that Sarah will bear a son. The covenant of circumcision is given to Abraham, and he immediately has his household circumcised.
18 God now announces to His friend Abraham His determination to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah because of their heavy sin. Angels of Jehovah warn Lot and help him to flee from Sodom with his wife and two daughters. However, his wife, lingering to look at the things behind, becomes a pillar of salt. In order to procure offspring, Lot’s daughters get their father intoxicated with wine, and through intercourse with him, they bear two sons, who become the fathers of the nations of Moab and Ammon.
19 God protects Sarah from contamination by Abimelech of the Philistines. The promised heir, Isaac, is born when Abraham is 100 years old and Sarah about 90. Some five years after this, the 19-year-old Ishmael pokes fun at Isaac, the heir, resulting in the dismissal of Hagar and Ishmael, with God’s approval. Some years later, God tests Abraham by commanding him to sacrifice his son Isaac on one of the mountains of Moriah. Abraham’s great faith in Jehovah does not waver. He attempts to offer up his son and heir but is stopped by Jehovah, who provides a ram as a substitute sacrifice. Jehovah again confirms His promise to Abraham, saying that He will multiply Abraham’s seed like the stars of heaven and the grains of sand that are on the seashore. He shows that this seed will take possession of the gate of his enemies and that all nations of the earth will certainly bless themselves by means of the Seed.
20 Sarah dies at the age of 127 and is buried in a field that Abraham buys from the sons of Heth. Abraham now sends his chief household servant to obtain a wife for Isaac from the country of his relatives. Jehovah guides the servant to the family of Nahor’s son Bethuel, and arrangements are made for Rebekah to return with him. Rebekah goes willingly, with her family’s blessing, and becomes the bride of Isaac. Abraham, on his part, takes another wife, Keturah, who bears him six sons. However, he gives these gifts and sends them away and makes Isaac his sole heir. Then, at the age of 175, Abraham dies.
21 As Jehovah had foretold, Isaac’s half brother Ishmael becomes the head of a great nation, founded upon his 12 chieftain-sons. For 20 years Rebekah remains barren, but Isaac keeps on entreating Jehovah, and she gives birth to twins, Esau and Jacob, of whom Jehovah had told her the older would serve the younger. Isaac is now 60 years old.
22 Jacob and his 12 sons (25:27–37:1). Esau becomes a lover of hunting. Failing to appreciate the covenant with Abraham, he returns from the hunt one day and sells his birthright to Jacob for a mere swallow of stew. He also marries two Hittite women (and later an Ishmaelite), who become a source of bitterness to his parents. With his mother’s assistance, Jacob disguises himself as Esau in order to obtain the firstborn’s blessing. Esau, who had not revealed to Isaac that he had sold the birthright, now plans to kill Jacob when he learns of what Jacob has done, so Rebekah advises that Jacob flee to Haran to her brother Laban. Before Jacob leaves, Isaac blesses him again and instructs him to take as a wife, not a pagan, but someone from his mother’s household. At Bethel, on his way to Haran, in a dream he sees Jehovah, who reassures him and confirms the covenant promise toward him.
23 At Haran, Jacob works for Laban, marrying his two daughters, Leah and Rachel. Though this polygamous marriage is brought on him by a trick of Laban, God blesses it by giving Jacob 12 sons and a daughter through the wives and their two maidservants, Zilpah and Bilhah. God sees to it that the flocks of Jacob increase greatly and then instructs him to return to the land of his forefathers. He is pursued by Laban, but they make a covenant at the place called Galeed and The Watchtower (Hebrew, ham·Mits·pah'). Resuming the journey, Jacob is reassured by angels and grapples at night with an angel, who finally blesses him and changes his name from Jacob to Israel. Jacob peacefully negotiates a meeting with Esau and travels on to Shechem. Here his daughter, Dinah, is violated by the Hivite chieftain’s son. Her brothers Simeon and Levi take revenge by slaughtering the men of Shechem. This displeases Jacob because it gives him, as a representative of Jehovah, a bad name in the land. God tells him to go to Bethel to make an altar there. On the trek out of Bethel, Rachel dies while bearing to Jacob his 12th son, Benjamin. Reuben violates Rachel’s maidservant, Bilhah, the mother of two of Jacob’s sons, and for this he forfeits the birthright. Soon afterward Isaac dies, at 180 years of age, and Esau and Jacob bury him.
24 Esau and his household move to the mountainous region of Seir, the accumulated wealth of Esau and Jacob being too great to permit their dwelling together any longer. The lists of Esau’s offspring as well as the sheiks and the kings of Edom are given. Jacob continues dwelling in Canaan.
25 To Egypt for the preservation of life (37:2–50:26). Because of Jehovah’s favor and some dreams that he causes Joseph to have, the older brothers come to hate Joseph. They scheme to kill him but instead sell him to some passing Ishmaelite merchants. Dipping Joseph’s striped garment in the blood of a goat, they present it to Jacob as evidence that the young lad of 17 has been killed by a wild beast. Joseph is taken to Egypt and sold to Potiphar, the chief of Pharaoh’s bodyguard.
26 Chapter 38 digresses momentarily to give the account of the birth of Perez to Tamar, who, by strategy, causes Judah her father-in-law to perform the marriage due toward her that should have been performed by his son. This account again underlines the extreme care with which the Scriptures record each development leading to the production of the Seed of promise. Judah’s son Perez becomes one of the ancestors of Jesus.—Luke 3:23, 33.
27 Meanwhile, Jehovah blesses Joseph in Egypt, and Joseph becomes great in Potiphar’s household. However, difficulty pursues him when he refuses to reproach God’s name by fornication with Potiphar’s wife, so he is falsely accused and thrown into prison. There he is used by Jehovah in interpreting the dreams of two fellow prisoners, Pharaoh’s cupbearer and his baker. Later, when Pharaoh has a dream that greatly worries him, Joseph’s ability is called to his attention, so that he is quickly brought to Pharaoh from his prison hole. Giving the credit to God, Joseph interprets the dream as forecasting seven years of plenty, to be followed by seven years of famine. Pharaoh recognizes “the spirit of God” upon Joseph and appoints him prime minister to handle the situation. (Gen. 41:38) Now 30 years of age, Joseph administers wisely by storing up foodstuffs during the seven years of plenty. Then during the worldwide famine that follows, he sells the grain to the people of Egypt and of other nations who come to Egypt for food.
28 Eventually Jacob sends his ten older sons to Egypt for grain. Joseph recognizes them, but they do not recognize him. Holding Simeon as hostage, he demands that they bring their youngest brother back with them on the next trip for grain. When the nine sons return with Benjamin, Joseph reveals himself, expresses forgiveness toward the ten guilty ones, and instructs them to get Jacob and move to Egypt for their welfare during the famine. Accordingly, Jacob, with 66 of his offspring, moves down to Egypt. Pharaoh gives them the best of the land, the land of Goshen, in which to dwell.
29 As Jacob draws close to death, he blesses Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph, and then calls his own 12 sons together to tell them what will happen to them “in the final part of the days.” (49:1) He now gives in detail a series of prophecies, all of which have since come to remarkable fulfillment. Here he foretells that the scepter of rulership will remain in the tribe of Judah until the coming of Shiloh (meaning “He Whose It Is; He to Whom It Belongs”), the promised Seed. After thus blessing the heads of the 12 tribes and giving commands concerning his own future burial in the Land of Promise, Jacob dies at the age of 147 years. Joseph continues to care for his brothers and their households until his own death at 110 years of age, at which time he expresses his faith that God will again bring Israel into their land and requests that his bones too be taken to that Land of Promise.
WHY BENEFICIAL
30 As the beginning of the inspired Word of God, Genesis 




ANANIAH
(A·na·ni'ah) [Jah Has Answered Me].
1. Father of Maaseiah and grandfather to Azariah, who assisted Nehemiah in rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem.—Ne 3:23.
2. A city inhabited by members of the tribe of Benjamin after the return from exile. (Ne 11:32) It is believed to be the same as Bethany (el-?Azariyeh [El ?Eizariya]) 2.5 km (1.5 mi) ESE of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.—See BETHANY No. 1.
ANANIAS
(An·a·ni'as) [Gr. form of the Heb. name Hananiah, meaning “Jehovah Has Shown Favor; Jehovah Has Been Gracious”].
1. A member of the early Christian congregation of Jerusalem. Following Pentecost of 33 C.E. the physical needs of the believers who remained in Jerusalem were cared for by mutual assistance among the Christians. A common fund was set up for this purpose. It was sustained by contributions representing the price of fields and houses sold by members of the congregation and then voluntarily donated. (Ac 4:34-37) Ananias sold a field and, with his wife’s full knowledge, presented a part of the money obtained, while giving the appearance of turning in the entire sum, no doubt to gain a measure of commendation and esteem within the congregation. However, through a special gift of knowledge by the spirit, Peter discerned his pretense, exposed him as ‘playing false to the holy spirit and to God,’ and Ananias fell down and expired. When the men who buried him returned in about three hours, they found his wife Sapphira also dead for having tried to keep up the same false pretense.—Ac 5:1-10.
2. A Christian disciple of Damascus. Following the conversion of Saul, Ananias was given a vision in which Jesus gave him Saul’s name and address with instructions to visit him. Though at first hesitant because he knew of Saul’s fiery persecution of the Christians, Ananias thereafter responded and went to Saul, caused him to recover his sight, informed him of his commission to be God’s witness, and arranged for his baptism. Saul (Paul), in a later defense before opposing Jews, referred to Ananias as a man “reverent according to the Law, well reported on by all the Jews dwelling there [in Damascus].” In view of his being a Christian, such Jewish commendation was indeed a remarkable testimony to his right conduct.—Ac 9:10-18; 22:12-16.
3. Jewish high priest from about 48 to 58 C.E. He was the son of Nedebaeus and was appointed to office by Herod, king of Chalcis, the brother of Herod Agrippa I. (Josephus’ Jewish Antiquities, XX, 103 [v, 2]) He was sent to Rome in 52 C.E. to stand trial because of certain difficulties that had arisen between the Jews and the Samaritans, but he was acquitted by Claudius I, the emperor.
In about 56 C.E., while presiding at Paul’s trial before the Sanhedrin, Ananias ordered Paul to be struck in the face. Paul reacted to this by predicting that God would repay such wrong action, and he referred to Ananias as a “whitewashed wall.” Called to account for this, Paul excused himself as being unaware of the fact that the source of the order to strike him was the high priest and quoted Exodus 22:28 in acknowledgment of his obligation to show due respect. Some suggest that Paul’s plea of ignorance was because Ananias’ position as high priest was not legally certain after his return from Rome, but proof for this is not substantial. It could be simply an additional evidence of poor eyesight on Paul’s part, as appears to be indicated in other texts. Ananias’ command may have been brief enough and sufficiently charged with emotion to make it difficult for Paul to identify the speaker.—Ac 23:2-5.
Following the Sanhedrin trial Ananias, accompanied by certain older men and a public orator, traveled to Caesarea to press charges against Paul before Governor Felix. (Ac 24:1) No further mention of him is made in the Scriptural record. Secular history, however, represents him as a haughty and cruel person, whose conduct, both during his high priesthood and in the years following his removal, was marked by greed. Toward the beginning of the Jewish revolt of 66-70 C.E., Ananias was pursued by elements of the Jewish population because of his collaboration with the Roman authorities. Though hiding out in an aqueduct, he was discovered and murdered.
ANATH
(A'nath).
1. The father of one of Israel’s judges, Shamgar.—Jg 3:31; 5:6.
2. One of the three principal Canaanite goddesses. She is presented both as the sister and spouse of Baal and as a symbol of lustful sex and war. There is no evidence, however, to show that the name of Shamgar’s father was drawn from that of the goddess Anath, although the apostasies of Israel during this period could allow for that.—Compare the case of Gideon at Jg 6:25-27.
ANATHOTH
(An'a·thoth).
1. A Benjamite, son of Becher.—1Ch 7:8.
2. One of the heads of the people whose descendant, if not he himself, attested to and sealed a trustworthy arrangement in the days of Nehemiah, to walk in the path of true worship of Jehovah.—Ne 9:38; 10:1, 19.
3. A Levite city in the territory of Benjamin. (Jos 21:17, 18; 1Ch 6:60) The name continues in that of the small village of ?Anata under 5 km (3 mi) NNE of Jerusalem, while the original site has been identified with Ras el-Kharrubeh about 800 m (0.5 mi) to the SW of the village. From its position on the hills, a view can be had of the Jordan Valley and the northern part of the Salt Sea. Anathoth was the home of two of David’s mighty men. (2Sa 23:27; 1Ch 12:3) It was to Anathoth that Solomon banished Abiathar, thus bringing to an end the line of high priests from the house of Eli. (1Ki 2:26) Anathoth was one of the afflicted cities in the line of attack of invading Assyrian armies.—Isa 10:30.
Jeremiah was from Anathoth but became a ‘prophet without honor’ among his own people, as they threatened his life for speaking Jehovah’s message of truth. (Jer 1:1; 11:21-23; 29:27) As a result, Jehovah foretold calamity for the city, and this came in due time when Babylon overran the land. (Jer 11:21-23) Prior to Jerusalem’s fall, Jeremiah exercised his legal rights to purchase his cousin’s tract of land at Anathoth as a sign that there would be a restoration from exile. (Jer 32:7-9) Among the first group of those returning from exile with Zerubbabel were 128 men of Anathoth; and Anathoth is included among the towns that were resettled, thus fulfilling Jeremiah’s prophecy.—Ezr 2:23; Ne 7:27; 11:32.
ANATHOTHITE
(An'a·thoth·ite) [Of (Belonging to) Anathoth].
An inhabitant of Anathoth, a priestly city in the territory of Benjamin.—2Sa 23:27; 1Ch 11:28; 12:3; 27:12.
ANCHOR
See SHIP.
ANCIENT OF DAYS
A translation of the Aramaic expression ?at·tiq' yoh·min', which indicates “one advanced (or aged) in days.” This title of Jehovah appears only at Daniel 7:9, 13, and 22 and alternates with the title “Supreme One.” (Da 7:18, 22, 25, 27) The scene is a courtroom where the Ancient of Days sits to judge the world powers, described under the symbolism of huge beasts. Their lease of rulership over the earth is taken away, and the “rulership and dignity and kingdom” are given to one “like a son of man” to whom all peoples are commanded to render obedience.—Da 7:10-14.
The title “Ancient of Days” appropriately contrasts the everlasting God with the successive world powers that rise and fall, and it portrays Jehovah in his role as the majestic and venerable Judge of all.—Ps 90:2; 75:7.
ANDREW
(An'drew) [from a Gr. root meaning “man; male person”; probably, Manly].
A brother of Simon Peter and son of Jonah (John). (Mt 4:18; 16:17) While Andrew’s native city was Bethsaida, he and Simon were living together in Capernaum at the time Jesus called them to become “fishers of men.” (Mr 1:16, 17, 21, 29; Joh 1:44) Both cities were on the N shore of the Sea of Galilee, where the two brothers engaged in the fishing business in partnership with James and John.—Mt 4:18; Mr 1:16; Lu 5:10.
Andrew was first a disciple of John the Baptizer. (Joh 1:35, 40) In the fall of 29 C.E. he was at Bethany on the E side of the Jordan River and heard John the Baptizer introduce Jesus as “the Lamb of God.” (Joh 1:29) He, along with another disciple (likely John), followed Jesus to his residence and was soon convinced he had found the Messiah. He then found and informed his brother Simon and led him to Jesus. (Joh 1:36-41) The two brothers returned to their fishing business, but between six months and a year later, after the arrest of John the Baptizer, they, along with James and John, were invited by Jesus to become “fishers of men.” They immediately abandoned their nets and began accompanying Jesus. (Mt 4:18-20; Mr 1:14, 16-20) In time these four became apostles, and it is notable that Andrew is always listed as among the first four in all the apostolic lists.—Mt 10:2; Mr 3:18; Lu 6:14.
Andrew thereafter receives but brief mention. He and Philip discuss with Jesus the problem of feeding a crowd of about 5,000 men, and Andrew offers a suggestion that he himself considers of little practical value about some available food. (Joh 6:8, 9) At the time of the last Passover festival that they celebrated, Philip comes to Andrew for advice about a request of some Greeks to see Jesus, and the two then approach Jesus on the matter. (Joh 12:20-22) He is among the four on the Mount of Olives who ask Jesus for the sign that would mark the conclusion of the existing system of things. (Mr 13:3) The final mention of Andrew by name is shortly after Jesus’ ascension.—Ac 1:13.
ANDRONICUS
(An·dron'i·cus) [Man-Conquering].
A faithful Jewish Christian in the congregation at Rome to whom Paul sent greetings. Paul calls Andronicus and Junias “my relatives.” While the Greek word used here (syg·ge·nes') in its broader sense can mean “fellow-countrymen,” the primary meaning is “blood relatives of the same generation.” The context indicates that Andronicus likely was so related to Paul. Like Paul, Andronicus had suffered imprisonment, was now a ‘man of note’ among the apostles, and had become a Christian prior to Paul.—Ro 16:7.
ANEM
(A'nem).
A city near the S border of Issachar, given as a Levite city to the Gershonites. (1Ch 6:71, 73) In the corresponding list at Joshua 21:29, Anem appears to be referred to as En-gannim, probably the complete name.—See EN-GANNIM No. 2.
ANER
(A'ner).
1. A Canaanite. He and his two brothers, Mamre the Amorite and Eshcol, were “confederates” (“allies,” AT; RS) of Abraham. (Ge 14:13) The word “confederates” is here translated from the Hebrew ba·?aleh' verith', which literally means “owners (masters) of a covenant”; but “confederate” is from the Latin confoederatus, meaning “united,” or “joined by a league,” and hence properly translates the idea, the word foedus occurring in Genesis 14:13 in the Latin Vulgate. As to the terms of this agreement between these three brothers and Abraham, little indication is given in the record as to whether it was one of mutual defense against their warlike neighbors or simply one of peaceful coexistence. When Abraham’s nephew Lot was taken captive by a league of kings, this confederacy saw action, as Aner with his brothers accompanied Abraham and his 318 trained servants from the big trees of Mamre (where Abraham was tenting) up to Dan, about 200 km (120 mi) to the NNE, and then on beyond Damascus. After the victory, Abraham refused any part of the spoil but saw to it that the three confederates were given a share for honoring this “confederacy.”—Ge 14:24; see ALLIANCE.
2. A town of the territory of Manasseh given to the families of the sons of Kohath. (1Ch 6:70; Jos 21:26) Some scholars believe it is the same as Taanach at Joshua 21:25.—See TAANACH.
ANGEL
Both the Hebrew mal·'akh' and the Greek ag'ge·los literally mean “messenger.” From the first book of the Bible to the last, these words occur nearly 400 times. When spirit messengers are indicated, the words are translated “angels,” but if the reference definitely is to human creatures, the rendering is “messengers.” (Ge 16:7; 32:3; Jas 2:25; Re 22:8; see MESSENGER.) However, in the highly symbolic book of Revelation certain references to ‘angels’ may apply to human creatures.—Re 2:1, 8, 12, 18; 3:1, 7, 14.
Angels are sometimes termed spirits; that which is spirit is invisible and powerful. Thus we read: “A spirit came out and stood before Jehovah”; “Are they not all spirits for public service?” (1Ki 22:21; Heb 1:14) Having invisible spiritual bodies, they make their abode “in the heavens.” (Mr 12:25; 1Co 15:44, 50) They are also termed “sons of the true God,” “morning stars,” and “holy myriads” (or “holy ones”).—Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7; De 33:2.
Not being creatures that marry and reproduce their own kind, the angels were individually created by Jehovah through his firstborn Son, “the beginning of the creation by God.” (Mt 22:30; Re 3:14) “By means of him [this firstborn Son, the Word] all other things were created in the heavens . . . the things invisible . . . Also, he is before all other things and by means of him all other things were made to exist.” (Col 1:15-17; Joh 1:1-3) The angels were created long before man’s appearance, for at the ‘founding of the earth’ “the morning stars joyfully cried out together, and all the sons of God began shouting in applause.”—Job 38:4-7.
As for the number of the angelic hosts of heaven, Daniel said he saw “a thousand thousands that kept ministering to [God], and ten thousand times ten thousand that kept standing right before him.”—Da 7:10; Heb 12:22; Jude 14.
Order and Rank. As with the visible creation, so also in the invisible realm there is order and rank among the angels. The foremost angel, both in power and authority, is Michael, the archangel. (Da 10:13, 21; 12:1; Jude 9; Re 12:7; see ARCHANGEL; MICHAEL No. 1.) Because of his preeminence and his being called “the great prince who is standing in behalf of the sons of [God’s] people,” he is presumed to be the angel that led Israel through the wilderness. (Ex 23:20-23) Ranking very high among the angels in privileges and honor are the seraphs. (Isa 6:2, 6; see SERAPHS.) More frequently (some 90 times), the Scriptures mention the cherubs, and from the description of their duties and responsibilities it is apparent that they, too, hold a special position among the angels. (Ge 3:24; Eze 10:1-22; see CHERUB No. 1.) Then there is the great body of angelic messengers who serve as a means of communication between God and man. However, they do more than simply relay messages. As agents and deputies of the Most High God, they serve as responsible executioners of the divine purpose, be it protection and deliverance of God’s people or destruction of the wicked.—Ge 19:1-26.
Personality. Some may deny distinct personality of individual angels, claiming they are impersonal forces of energy dispatched to accomplish the will of God, but the Bible teaches otherwise. Individual names imply individuality. The fact that two of their names, Michael and Gabriel, are given establishes the point sufficiently. (Da 12:1; Lu 1:26) The lack of more names was a safeguard against giving undue honor and worship to these creatures. Angels were dispatched by God as agents to act in his name, not in their own name. Hence, when Jacob asked an angel for his name, he refused to give it. (Ge 32:29) The angel that approached Joshua, when asked to identify himself, replied only that he was “prince of the army of Jehovah.” (Jos 5:14) When Samson’s parents asked an angel for his name, he withheld it, saying: “Just why should you ask about my name, when it is a wonderful one?” (Jg 13:17, 18) The apostle John attempted to worship angels and was twice rebuked: “Be careful! Do not do that! . . . Worship God.”—Re 19:10; 22:8, 9.
As personalities, angels have the power to communicate with one another (1Co 13:1), the ability to talk various languages of men (Nu 22:32-35; Da 4:23; Ac 10:3-7), and the thinking ability with which to glorify and praise Jehovah (Ps 148:2; Lu 2:13). It is true that angels are sexless, because Jehovah made them so, not because they are impersonal forces. Angels are generally represented as males, and when materializing it was always in the male form, because God and his Son are spoken of as males. However, when certain materialized angels indulged in the pleasure of sex in the days of Noah, they were expelled from Jehovah’s heavenly courts. Here was a display of angelic individuality, for, like humankind, they too are free moral agents, with the power of personal choice between right and wrong. (Ge 6:2, 4; 2Pe 2:4) By personal choice, hordes of angels joined Satan in his rebellion.—Re 12:7-9; Mt 25:41.
Powers and Privileges. Since God created man “a little lower than angels” (Heb 2:7), it follows that angels have a greater mental capacity than man. They are superhuman in power too. “Bless Jehovah, O you angels of his, mighty in power, carrying out his word.” Angelic knowledge and power were displayed when two angels brought flaming destruction upon Sodom and Gomorrah. A single angel killed 185,000 of the Assyrian army.—Ps 103:20; Ge 19:13, 24; 2Ki 19:35.
Angels too can travel at tremendous speeds, far exceeding the limits of the physical world. Thus when Daniel was praying, God dispatched an angel to answer his prayer; and the angel arrived within moments, even before the prayer was concluded.—Da 9:20-23.
But for all their higher mental and spiritual powers, angels have their limitations. They did not know the “day and hour” when this system of things would be swept away, Jesus said. (Mt 24:36) They take a keen interest in the outworking of Jehovah’s purposes, yet there are some things they do not understand. (1Pe 1:12) They rejoice at the repentance of a sinner, and they watch the “theatrical spectacle” furnished by Christians here on the world stage of public activity. They also observe the proper example of Christian women who wear a sign of authority upon their heads.—Lu 15:10; 1Co 4:9; 11:10; see IMMORTALITY (Kingdom Heirs Granted Immortality).
As Jehovah’s ministers, the angels have enjoyed many privileges during the aeons of passing time. Angels ministered on behalf of Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Isaiah, Daniel, Zechariah, Peter, Paul, and John, to mention but a few. (Ge 22:11; 31:11; Jos 5:14, 15; Isa 6:6, 7; Da 6:22; Zec 1:9; Ac 5:19, 20; 7:35; 12:7, 8; 27:23, 24; Re 1:1) Their messages contributed toward the writing of the Bible. In Revelation angels are mentioned far more times than in any other Bible book. Innumerable angels were seen around the great throne of Jehovah; seven blew the seven trumpets, while another seven poured out the seven bowls of God’s anger; an angel flying in midheaven had “everlasting good news”; but another proclaimed, “Babylon the Great has fallen.”—Re 5:11; 7:11; 8:6; 14:6, 8; 16:1.
Support of Christ and followers. From beginning to end, the holy angels of God followed the earthly sojourn of Jesus with extreme interest. They announced his conception and birth, and they ministered to him after the 40-day fast. An angel strengthened him when he prayed in Gethsemane on his final night as a human. When the mob came to arrest him, he could have called for no less than 12 legions of angels had he chosen to do so. Angels also announced his resurrection and were present at his ascension into heaven.—Mt 4:11; 26:53; 28:5-7; Lu 1:30, 31; 2:10, 11; 22:43; Ac 1:10, 11.
Thereafter, God’s spirit messengers continued ministering to his servants on earth, even as Jesus promised: “Do not despise one of these little ones; for I tell you that their angels in heaven always behold the face of my Father.” (Mt 18:10) “Are they not all spirits for public service, sent forth to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation?” (Heb 1:14) No longer do these mighty angelic ones appear visibly in behalf of Jehovah’s servants on earth, as when they delivered the apostles from prison; nevertheless, God’s servants are assured of the ever-present, invisible protecting armies, as real as those that surrounded the prophet Elisha and his servant. “He will give his own angels a command concerning you, to guard you in all your ways.” Yes, “the angel of Jehovah is camping all around those fearing him, and he rescues them.”—Ps 91:11; 34:7; Ac 5:19; 2Ki 6:15-17.
Angels are further shown accompanying Jesus Christ when he comes for judgment, separating “the wheat” from “the weeds” and “the sheep” from “the goats.” Angels joined with Michael in his war on the dragon and the demons at the birth of God’s Kingdom in heaven. They will also support the King of kings in fighting the war of the great day of God the Almighty.—Mt 13:41; 25:31-33; Re 12:7-10; 19:14-16.
ANGER
In the Bible several different Hebrew and Greek words are used to denote anger. The most common Hebrew word for anger is 'aph, basically meaning “nose; nostril” but often used figuratively for “anger” because of the violent breathing or snorting of an enraged person. (Compare Ps 18:7, 8; Eze 38:18.) Related to 'aph is 'a·naph', meaning “be incensed.” Anger is also often associated in the Hebrew Scriptures with heat and thus is said to blaze. Other Hebrew words are rendered “rage,” “fury,” and “indignation.” In the Christian Greek Scriptures or·ge' is generally translated “wrath,” while thy·mos' is usually rendered “anger.”
God’s Anger. Anger may be justified or unjustified. On God’s part, his anger is always justified, being based on principle dictated by his right to exclusive devotion and his constancy in upholding truth; it is governed by his love for righteousness and for those practicing righteousness. Divine anger does not stem from a momentary whim, to be later regretted. Jehovah sees all the issues involved in a matter and has complete, entire knowledge of a situation. (Heb 4:13) He reads the heart; he notes the degree of ignorance, negligence, or willful sin; and he acts with impartiality.—De 10:17, 18; 1Sa 16:7; Ac 10:34, 35.
Principles controlling divine wrath. God’s anger is always under control and in harmony with his attributes of love, wisdom, and justice. Because of his almighty power it is expressible to the degree he desires. (1Jo 4:8; Job 12:13; 37:23) God’s anger is not futile. It is fully based on sufficient cause and always takes effect. His anger is satisfied and quieted only by the application of his principles. For example, in Israel a willful murderer could not be ransomed. Only by the shedding of his blood could the land be cleansed and freed from God’s displeasure. (Nu 35:16-18, 30-33) But an arrangement was made on the basis of sacrifices and the services of the high priest to satisfy justice and to allay the anger of the God-ordained avenger of blood, whose heart may have been “hot.” This was the provision of the cities of refuge.—De 19:4-7.
The anger of Jehovah can be allayed or satisfied only when justice is fully carried out. God’s wrath is against all unrighteousness. He will not tolerate unrighteousness or exempt from punishment one deserving it. (Ex 34:7; Hab 1:13) However, on the basis of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, who bore the pains and chastisement justly due mankind, God’s anger may be relieved and turned away for those who come to exercise faith. (Isa 53:5) By means of this arrangement, Jehovah God is able to exhibit his own righteousness, “that he might be righteous even when declaring righteous the man that has faith in Jesus.” (Ro 3:26) In this way justice is fully satisfied, and yet God has a basis on which to extend mercy. Anyone who is disobedient has the wrath of God remaining upon him. (Joh 3:36) But when a person exercises faith, the sacrifice of Jesus Christ saves him from the wrath of God.—1Th 1:10.
Means for expressing and the causes of anger. God’s anger may be expressed directly or indirectly. He may use his laws governing natural things, or he may use other persons as instruments to express his anger. Those who violate his moral laws are under his wrath and receive in themselves “the full recompense, which was due for their error.” These suffer a disapproved mental state, degradation, diseases, strife, and death. (Ro 1:18, 24, 27-32) When a person violates laws of the land that are in harmony with God’s laws and is punished by the governmental authority, this is an indirect expression of God’s wrath against that one. (Ro 13:1-4) Jesus Christ is the chief executioner of God’s anger, and he will completely express God’s wrath to fulfill his anger against the wicked.—Jer 30:23, 24; Re 19:7-16, 19-21.
Wrong attitudes and actions toward God’s chosen ones will provoke his anger. The Egyptians were plagued because of not letting Israel worship Jehovah. (Ps 78:43-50) Miriam and Aaron felt the heat of divine anger because of disrespect for Moses’ God-appointed position. (Nu 12:9, 10) Jehovah’s anger was against judges who oppressed the lowly. (Isa 10:1-4) Those who hinder the preaching of the good news are in line for God’s wrath.—1Th 2:16.
Jehovah is provoked to anger by false worship, especially when his professed people turn away to other gods. (Ex 32:7-10; Nu 25:3, 4; Jg 2:13, 14, 20; 1Ki 11:8, 9) His anger is aroused by immorality, suppression of the truth, unrepentance, disobedience to the good news, the despising of his words, mocking at his prophets, covetousness, injuriousness, envy, murder, strife, deceit, malicious disposition; by those who are whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, self-assuming, inventors of injurious things, disobedient to parents, false to agreements, merciless, spiritists, and liars. All of these and the practice of any other unrighteousness provoke God’s anger.—Col 3:5, 6; 2Th 1:8; Ro 1:18, 29-31; 2:5, 8; 2Ch 36:15, 16; Re 22:15.
Anger not a dominant quality. However, Jehovah God is “slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness.” (Ex 34:6; Nu 14:18) If one fears Jehovah and works righteousness, he will receive mercy from Jehovah, for the Almighty recognizes man’s inherited imperfection and shows mercy to him on this account and on the basis of Jesus’ sacrifice. (Ps 103:13, 14; Ge 8:21; see also Zep 2:2, 3.) He checks his anger in behalf of his name and in order to carry out his purpose toward his chosen people. (Isa 48:9; Joe 2:13, 14) Jehovah’s anger in time passes from those who truly serve him, acknowledge their sin, and repent. (Isa 12:1; Ps 30:5) He is not an angry God but a happy God, not unapproachable but pleasant, peaceful, and calm toward those who properly approach his presence. (1Ti 1:11; Ps 16:11; compare Re 4:3.) This is in contrast to the angry, merciless, cruel characteristics ascribed to the false gods of the pagans and portrayed in images of these gods.
What place does anger have in the life of a servant of God?
Man’s expression of anger may be proper if it is based on principle. One may rightly express righteous indignation. We are commanded to “abhor what is wicked.” (Ro 12:9) The Bible provides numerous examples of righteous indignation.—Ex 11:8; 32:19; Nu 16:12-15; 1Sa 20:34; Ne 5:6; Es 7:7; see also 2Sa 12:1-6.
However, the anger of man is more often unjustified and is many times uncontrolled. It is often based on insufficient cause and expressed without due regard for the consequences. After Jehovah had spared Nineveh, Jonah was displeased, “and he got to be hot with anger.” Jonah lacked mercy and had to be corrected by Jehovah. (Jon 4:1-11) King Uzziah of Judah became enraged when corrected by the priests of Jehovah and went ahead in his presumptuous course, for which he was punished. (2Ch 26:16-21) Naaman’s ill-advised pride caused indignation and rage on his part, almost resulting in the loss of a blessing from God.—2Ki 5:10-14.
Vital need for control. Unjustified and uncontrolled anger has led many persons into greater sin, even acts of violence. “Cain grew hot with great anger” and slew Abel. (Ge 4:5, 8) Esau wanted to kill Jacob, who received the blessing of their father. (Ge 27:41-45) Saul in his rage hurled spears at David and Jonathan. (1Sa 18:11; 19:10; 20:30-34) Those in attendance at the synagogue in Nazareth, aroused to anger by Jesus’ preaching, endeavored to hurl him from the brow of a mountain. (Lu 4:28, 29) Angered religious leaders “rushed upon [Stephen] with one accord” and stoned him to death.—Ac 7:54-60.
Anger, even when justified, if not controlled, may be dangerous, producing bad results. Simeon and Levi had reason to be indignant at Shechem for violating their sister Dinah, though some of the blame was hers. But the wanton slaughter of the Shechemites was an excessive penalty to inflict. Hence their father Jacob denounced their uncontrolled anger, cursing it. (Ge 34:1-31; 49:5-7) When under heavy provocation a person should control his anger. The complaint and rebelliousness of the Israelites provoked Moses, the meekest man on the earth, to an uncontrolled act of anger in which he failed to sanctify Jehovah, and for which he was punished.—Nu 12:3; 20:10-12; Ps 106:32, 33.
Fits of anger are classified along with other detestable works of the flesh, such as loose conduct, idolatry, practice of spiritism, and drunken bouts. Such will keep one from inheriting God’s Kingdom. (Ga 5:19-21) Angry talk is to be kept out of the congregation. Men representing the congregation in prayer should be free from feelings of anger and ill will. (1Ti 2:8) Christians are commanded to be slow about wrath, being told that man’s wrath does not work out God’s righteousness. (Jas 1:19, 20) They are counseled to “yield place to the wrath” and to leave vengeance to Jehovah. (Ro 12:19) A man cannot be used as an overseer in the congregation of God if he is prone to wrath.—Tit 1:7.
While a person may on occasion be angry and sometimes justifiably so, he should not let it become sin to him by harboring it or maintaining a provoked state. He should not let the sun set with him in such a condition, for he would thereby allow place for the Devil to take advantage of him. (Eph 4:26, 27) Especially if it is a case of anger between Christian brothers, he should take proper steps to make peace or get the matter settled in the God-provided way. (Le 19:17, 18; Mt 5:23, 24; 18:15; Lu 17:3, 4) The Scriptures counsel that we should watch our associations in this regard, not having companionship with anyone given to anger or fits of rage, thereby avoiding a snare for our souls.—Pr 22:24, 25.
Jesus Christ, when a man on earth, gave us the perfect example. The records of his life do not recount one occasion where he had a fit of uncontrolled anger or where he allowed the lawlessness, rebelliousness, and harassment of the enemies of God to upset his spirit and cause him to reflect such a thing toward his followers or others. On one occasion he was “thoroughly grieved” at the insensibility of the hearts of the Pharisees and looked upon them with indignation. His next act was an act of healing. (Mr 3:5) When he, in another instance, drove out those who were defiling God’s temple as well as violating the Law of Moses by making Jehovah’s house a house of merchandise, it was through no uncontrolled, unjustified fit of anger. Rather, the Scriptures show that it was properly directed zeal for the house of Jehovah.—Joh 2:13-17.
Avoiding the damaging effects. Not only does anger have an adverse effect upon our spiritual health but it produces profound effects on the physical organism. It can cause rise in blood pressure, arterial changes, respiratory trouble, liver upsets, changes in the secretion of gall, effects on the pancreas. Anger and rage, as strong emotions, have been listed by physicians as contributing to, aggravating, or even causing such ailments as asthma, eye afflictions, skin diseases, hives, ulcers, and dental and digestive troubles. Rage and fury can upset thinking processes so that one cannot form logical conclusions or pass sound judgment. The aftermath of a fit of rage is often a period of extreme mental depression. It is therefore wisdom not only in a religious sense but in a physical sense to keep anger under control and to pursue peace and love.—Pr 14:29, 30; Ro 14:19; Jas 3:17; 1Pe 3:11.
According to the Scriptures, the time of the end is a time of rage and fury, with the nations becoming angry at Jehovah’s taking over his power to reign, and the Devil being hurled to the earth, “having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” (Re 11:17, 18; 12:10-12) With such strenuous conditions, the Christian will do well to control his spirit, avoiding the destructive emotion of anger.—Pr 14:29; Ec 7:9.
ANIAM
(A·ni'am) [I Am [of the] People [that is, a kinsman]].
A son of Shemida of the tribe of Manasseh.—1Ch 7:14, 19.
ANIM
(A'nim).
A city in the mountainous region of southern Judah, mentioned in the distribution of land in the days of Joshua. (Jos 15:48, 50) It has been identified with Khirbet Ghuwein et-Tahta (Horvat ?Anim), a ruin situated about 5 km (3 mi) S of Eshtemoa and about 19 km (12 mi) SSW of Hebron.
ANIMALS
Living souls that are not human. (Compare Nu 31:28.) The Hebrew word behe·mah' refers to larger four-footed creatures, usually domestic animals but occasionally wild beasts. It is rendered “domestic animals,” “beasts,” “livestock,” and “cattle.” (Ge 1:26; 9:10; 34:23; Ps 107:38) The Hebrew re'mes denotes “moving animals” or “creeping things” and comes from the root ra·mas', meaning “move; creep.” (Ge 6:20; Eze 8:10; Ge 1:28, ftn) Also, the Hebrew term chai·yah', literally meaning “living creature,” is used to refer to “wild beasts” or “wild animals.” (Ge 1:28; 3:14; Isa 56:9) The parallel Greek term is zoi'on (living creature), also rendered ‘animal.’—Re 4:7; 2Pe 2:12.
Jehovah God formed all the animals, each family kind having its own originally created representatives, for the record assures us that God made them each one “according to its kind.” (Ge 1:25) In this article we shall consider particularly land animals.
In view of God’s granting perfect man dominion over the various creatures of the earth, it was most appropriate that Adam be privileged to name these creatures. (Ge 1:26; 2:19, 20) Man’s having the animals in subjection placed upon him a stewardship for which he would always be accountable to God.—Lu 12:48.
Animals were so created that they would have a fear and dread of man as their superior. (Ge 9:2, 3) According to naturalists, wild creatures, such as the leopard and the king cobra, normally prefer to retreat from man’s presence, although they do attack when provoked, wounded, cornered, or suddenly surprised. It has been suggested that tigers become man-eaters, for example, by force of circumstances, such as old age or injury that would greatly limit the tiger’s ability to procure its normal game, or the depletion of the tiger’s game through man’s hunting.
Already prior to the Flood, animals were killed to provide clothing for man and for sacrificial purposes. (Ge 3:21; 4:4) However, not until after the Deluge did Noah and his family receive permission from Jehovah to add flesh to their diet, with the stipulation that it must be drained of its blood. (Ge 9:3, 4) While this made it proper for man to kill animals for necessary food, he was not authorized thereby to indulge in needless slaughter for the sheer thrill of the hunt or to display personal prowess, as Nimrod, the rebel against God, undoubtedly did.—Ge 10:9.
Some have contended that the presence of animals on isolated islands like Australia and New Zealand is an indication that not all land animals outside the ark perished in the Deluge. However, the findings of oceanographers indicate that at one time land ridges connected what are now isolated land areas. For example, oceanographic studies indicate that the Mid-Atlantic Ridge may have crossed that ocean above the surface. Possibly there were also other ridges, and animals could have migrated by means of these before such ridges sank below the surface of the ocean. Other oceanographic studies have turned up evidence that once there existed a huge South Pacific continent that took in Australia and many of the South Sea isles. If such was the case, then, of course, the animals had no difficulty in migrating to these lands.
Clean and Unclean Animals. A classification of animals is to be noted in God’s instructions to Noah to take with him into the ark seven of each clean animal and two of each unclean animal. (Ge 7:2, 3, 8, 9) Since a flesh diet had not yet been authorized, this distinction between clean and unclean was probably determined on the basis of what was acceptable to Jehovah as a sacrifice. Hence, on emerging from the ark, Noah knew which creatures were clean and suitable for offering upon the altar. (Ge 8:20) At that time no restriction existed with respect to the type of animals that Noah and his family could eat, as is indicated by Jehovah’s words: “Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you.”—Ge 9:3.
God’s law to the Israelites, therefore, introduced a new distinction when it classified certain animals as clean and fit for food and others as unclean and prohibited as food. The scripture specifies: “Every creature that splits the hoof and forms a cleft in the hoofs and chews the cud among the beasts, that is what you may eat.” (Le 11:3) And again: “You must eat no detestable thing of any sort. This is the sort of beast that you may eat: the bull, the sheep and the goat, the stag and gazelle and roebuck and wild goat and antelope and wild sheep and chamois; and every beast that splits the hoof and that forms a cleft into two hoofs, chewing the cud among the beasts.”—De 14:3-6.
Animals lacking one or both of the above-mentioned features were not to be eaten by those under the terms of the Law covenant. The prohibited animals included the rock badger, the hare, the pig, the camel. Also, creatures ‘going upon their paws’ were prohibited, this doubtless embracing such creatures as the lion, the bear, and the wolf.—Le 11:4-8, 26, 27; De 14:7, 8.
These dietary limitations applied only to those who were under the Mosaic Law, for the statement of Leviticus 11:8 is: “They are unclean for you,” that is, for the Israelites. With the abrogation of the Law on the basis of the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus, the prohibitions were canceled, and once more all humans could consider themselves under the same broad provision announced to Noah following the Deluge.—Col 2:13-17; Ge 9:3, 4.
Since the restriction concerning unclean foods was taken out of the way with the rest of the Law, a question may arise as to why Peter, about three and a half years later, still had not eaten any “unclean” animals. (Ac 10:10-15) It must be remembered that the cancellation of the Law resulted in great changes in the lives of Christ’s followers, and therefore, it reasonably took some time for them to appreciate all that was involved.
Illustrative Usage. The outstanding traits of animals are alluded to and used by Bible writers to symbolize a variety of qualities and powers. At times animal features may portray excellent qualities, divine as well as human. (Eze 1:10, 11; Re 4:6, 7) In other instances animals may be employed to represent wild, beastlike ruling powers that oppress and crush peoples.—Da 7:2-7; 8:5-8, 20, 21; Re 13:1-17; see BEASTS, SYMBOLIC.
Proper Use and View of Animal Creation. In connection with worship under the Mosaic Law, cattle, sheep, and goats were among the creatures acceptable for sacrifice. Such animals were to be sound ones, and no castrated animal was admissible. (Le 22:23-25) The use of animal blood for food or for any purpose other than sacrifice was prohibited. (Le 17:13, 14) Worship of any representation of an animal or other created thing was strictly forbidden.—Ex 20:4, 5.
The Bible inculcates just and merciful treatment of the lower creatures. Indeed, Jehovah represents himself as the Loving Provider for their lives and well-being. (Pr 12:10; Ps 145:15, 16) The Mosaic Law enjoined proper care of domestic animals. When found straying, domestic animals were to be returned safely to their owner; when crushed under a burden, they were to be relieved. (Ex 23:4, 5) They were to be worked humanely. (De 22:10; 25:4) They, as well as man, were to benefit from the Sabbath rests. (Ex 20:10; 23:12; De 5:14) Dangerous animals were to be controlled or destroyed. (Ge 9:5; Ex 21:28, 29) Crossbreeding of different sorts was forbidden.—Le 19:19.
God-fearing men see in animals part of God’s generous provision for human welfare. Animals have served man as burden bearers, as sources of food and clothing, as sanitation agents, and as helpers in the vital activities of plowing and harvesting. Their variety of form and color has delighted his eye; their habits and instincts have been and still are an extensive field for inquiry into the marvels of God’s creative work. Though animals die in the same manner as man, they do not share his hope of a resurrection.—2Pe 2:12; additionally, see individual animals, birds, insects, reptiles by name; also BIRDS; FISH; INSECTS.
ANKLET
The Hebrew words for “ankle chainlets” ('ets·?a·dhah'; Nu 31:50) and “step chains” (tse?a·dhah'; Isa 3:20) both come from the root tsa·?adh', meaning “take steps; march.” (Jer 10:5; Pr 7:8) The Hebrew ?e'khes (bangle; anklet) comes from the root ?a·khas', meaning “make a tinkling sound” or “shake bangles.” (Isa 3:16, 18, ftns) Ankle bracelets or ornamental rings worn on the legs above the ankles were in common use in the ancient Middle East. They were made of such materials as brass, gold, silver, iron, glass, and ivory. On Egyptian monuments persons of both sexes are depicted as wearing them, and in Egypt anklets and bracelets were frequently made as matching ensembles.
Heavy anklets might make a ringing sound as they knocked together while the wearer walked along. However, at times pebbles were placed in hollow bangles or anklets in order to produce a sound, and Arabian girls of more recent times have also occasionally worn anklets with small bells attached to them. Too, ankle chainlets were sometimes fastened to the anklets worn by a woman, thus tying these ornaments together. The chainlets would make tinkling sounds as the wearer walked, and of course, they and the anklets themselves would attract attention. Ankle chainlets or step chains would also restrict or shorten the woman’s step, so that she would walk with tripping steps and what might be considered a graceful or genteel feminine gait.—Isa 3:16.
“Ankle chainlets” were among pieces of jewelry the Israelites took from the Midianites as war booty and contributed as “Jehovah’s offering.” (Nu 31:50, 51) The haughty “daughters of Zion” of later times are described as women who “go walking with tripping steps, and with their feet they make a tinkling sound,” or “on their feet they shake bangles.” Through Isaiah, Jehovah warned them that he would take away their ornamental articles and “the beauty of the bangles,” or anklets, as well as their “step chains.” (Isa 3:16, 18, 20) The Babylonian conquest of Judah and Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E. surely made inroads into the lives of these women, resulting in the loss of their many ornaments and of their freedom.—See ORNAMENTS.
ANNA
(An'na) [from Heb., meaning “Favor; Grace”].
A prophetess, daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Asher. Her name is the Greek form of Hannah.
Anna had become a widow after just seven years of married life and, at the time of the child Jesus’ presentation at the temple, was 84 years of age. Nevertheless, she was constant in her attendance at the temple, evidently from the time of the morning service until the evening service and, as a result, was privileged to see the young child Jesus and bear witness about him. Her “fastings and supplications” indicate a mourning attitude and an earnest longing on her part. The centuries-long period of Jewish subjection, coupled with the deteriorating religious conditions that reached even to the temple and its priesthood, could well explain this. At any rate, though she might not have expected to be alive when the child became grown, she now joyfully witnessed to others of the liberation due to be effected through this coming Messiah.—Lu 2:36-38.
ANNAS
(An'nas) [from Heb., meaning “Showing Favor; Gracious”].
Appointed high priest about 6 or 7 C.E. by Quirinius, the Roman governor of Syria, and serving until about 15 C.E. (Lu 2:2) Annas was therefore high priest when Jesus, at the age of 12, amazed the rabbinic teachers at the temple. (Lu 2:42-49) Annas was removed as high priest by Procurator Valerius Gratus. Though he no longer had the official title, it was quite evident that he continued to exercise great power and influence as high priest emeritus and predominant voice of the Jewish hierarchy. Five of his sons, as well as his son-in-law Caiaphas, each held the office of high priest. Because of his prominent position, Annas is rightly designated in the Scriptures as one of the chief priests. (Mt 26:3; Lu 3:2) When Jesus was arrested, he was first taken to Annas for questioning and then was sent to Caiaphas for trial. (Joh 18:13) The name of Annas heads the list of the foremost opponents of the apostles of Jesus Christ.—Ac 4:6.
The wealthy and powerful house of Annas was of the tribe of Levi, and the sale of sacrifices within the temple grounds was one of their chief sources of income—reason enough why they sought to kill Jesus, who twice cleansed the temple, which they had made “a cave of robbers.” (Joh 2:13-16; Mt 21:12, 13; Mr 11:15-17; Lu 19:45, 46) An additional reason for Annas’ hatred of Jesus and his apostles was likely Jesus’ teaching of the resurrection, the raising of Lazarus in living proof, and the preaching and teaching of the same doctrine by the apostles, for if Annas was indeed a Sadducee, he did not believe in the resurrection.—Ac 23:8; compare 5:17.
ANOINTED, ANOINTING
The Bible often uses the Hebrew sukh and the Greek a·lei'pho for the commonplace greasing, or rubbing on of oil. (Da 10:3; Ru 3:3; Joh 11:2) But for a special anointing with oil, it generally uses the Hebrew word ma·shach', from which the word ma·shi'ach (Messiah) comes, and the Greek word khri'o, from which comes khri·stos' (Christ). (Ex 30:30; Le 4:5, ftn; Lu 4:18; Ac 4:26) This distinction is maintained quite consistently both in the Hebrew and in the Greek. Some versions of the Bible do not maintain this fine distinction but translate all such words by the one term “anoint.”
Rubbing or Greasing With Oil. In the lands of the Middle East it was a common practice to rub oil on the body, and among other things, this helped to protect the exposed portions from the intense rays of the sun. The oil also helped to keep the skin supple. Olive oil was generally used, and often perfume was added to it. The customary practice was to apply the oil after bathing. (Ru 3:3; 2Sa 12:20) Esther underwent a course of massage treatment for six months with oil of myrrh and for six months with oil of balsam before being presented to King Ahasuerus. (Es 2:12) Oil was also rubbed on the body in preparing a person for burial.—Mr 14:8; Lu 23:56.
When Jesus sent the 12 apostles out by twos, they greased with oil many whom they healed. The healing of the ailment was due to, not the oil itself, but the miraculous operation of God’s holy spirit. Oil, which did have some healing and refreshing properties, was symbolic of the healing and refreshing experienced.—Mr 6:13; Lu 9:1; compare Lu 10:34.
Greasing the head with oil was a sign of favor. (Ps 23:5) The headmen of Ephraim took favorable action toward the captured Judean soldiers by greasing them and returning them to Jericho, as advised by the prophet Oded. (2Ch 28:15) Jehovah spoke of bringing about a lack of oil for rubbing as a sign of his displeasure. (De 28:40) To refrain from rubbing one’s body with oil was regarded as a sign of mourning. (2Sa 14:2; Da 10:2, 3) To grease the head of a guest with oil was regarded as an act of hospitality and courtesy, as is indicated by Jesus’ words regarding a woman who greased his feet with perfumed oil.—Lu 7:38, 46.
Jesus told his disciples to grease their heads and wash their faces when fasting in order to appear normal, not making a show of sanctimoniousness and self-denial as the hypocritical Jewish religious leaders did to impress others.—Mt 6:16, 17.
James speaks of a spiritual ‘greasing with oil’ in the name of Jehovah for spiritually sick ones as the proper procedure for one needing spiritual help. That he refers to spiritual sickness is indicated by his statements: “Let him call the older men of the congregation,” not doctors, and, “if he has committed sins, it will be forgiven him.” (Jas 5:13-16) Jesus makes a spiritual application of the practice when he tells the Laodicean congregation to “buy from me . . . eyesalve to rub in your eyes that you may see.”—Re 3:18.
Anointing. When a person was anointed with oil, the oil was put on his head and allowed to run down on his beard and onto the collar of his garments. (Ps 133:2) During the times of Biblical history, both the Hebrews and some of the non-Hebrews ceremonially anointed rulers. This constituted the confirmation of their official appointment to office. (Jg 9:8, 15; 1Sa 9:16; 2Sa 19:10) Samuel anointed Saul as king after God had designated Saul as his choice. (1Sa 10:1) David was anointed as king on three different occasions: once by Samuel, later by the men of Judah, and finally by all the tribes. (1Sa 16:13; 2Sa 2:4; 5:3) Aaron was anointed after his appointment to the office of high priest. (Le 8:12) Afterward, Aaron and his sons had some of the anointing oil along with the blood of the sacrifices spattered upon their garments, but Aaron was the only one who had the oil poured over his head.—Le 8:30.
Things dedicated as sacred were also anointed. Jacob took the stone on which he rested his head when he had an inspired dream, set it up as a pillar, and anointed it, thus marking that place as sacred; and he called the place Bethel, meaning “House of God.” (Ge 28:18, 19) A short time later Jehovah acknowledged that this stone had been anointed. (Ge 31:13) In the wilderness of Sinai, at Jehovah’s command, Moses anointed the tabernacle and its furnishings, indicating that they were dedicated, holy things.—Ex 30:26-28.
There are instances in which a person was regarded as being anointed because of being appointed by God, even though no oil was put on his head. This principle was demonstrated when Jehovah told Elijah to anoint Hazael as king over Syria, Jehu as king over Israel, and Elisha as prophet in place of himself. (1Ki 19:15, 16) The Scriptural record goes on to show that one of the sons of the prophets associated with Elisha did anoint Jehu with literal oil, to be king over Israel. (2Ki 9:1-6) But there is no record that anyone anointed with oil either Hazael or Elisha. Moses was called a Christ, or Anointed One, although not anointed with oil, because Moses was appointed by Jehovah to be his prophet and representative, the leader and deliverer of Israel. (Heb 11:24-26) Another case in point is the Persian king Cyrus, whom Isaiah had foretold that Jehovah would use as His anointed. (Isa 45:1) Cyrus was not actually anointed with oil by one of Jehovah’s representatives, but because he was appointed by Jehovah to do a certain work, he could be said to be anointed.
In the Law Jehovah gave to Moses, he prescribed a formula for the anointing oil. It was of a special composition of the choicest ingredients—myrrh, sweet cinnamon, sweet calamus, cassia, and olive oil. (Ex 30:22-25) It was a capital offense for anyone to compound this mixture and to use it for any common or unauthorized purpose. (Ex 30:31-33) This figuratively demonstrated the importance and sacredness of an appointment to office that had been confirmed by anointing with sacred oil.
Fulfilling many prophecies in the Hebrew Scriptures, Jesus of Nazareth proved to be the Anointed One of Jehovah and could properly be called Messiah, or Christ, which titles convey that thought. (Mt 1:16; Heb 1:8, 9) Instead of being anointed with literal oil, he was anointed with Jehovah’s spirit. (Mt 3:16) This was Jehovah’s appointment of him as King, Prophet, and High Priest, and so he was referred to as Jehovah’s Anointed. (Ps 2:2; Ac 3:20-26; 4:26, 27; Heb 5:5, 6) In his hometown of Nazareth, Jesus acknowledged this anointing when he applied to himself the prophecy of Isaiah 61:1, where the phrase appears: “Jehovah has anointed me.” (Lu 4:18) Jesus Christ is the only one in the Scriptures who holds an anointing to all three offices: prophet, high priest, and king. Jesus was anointed with “the oil of exultation more than [his] partners” (the other kings of the line of David). This was by reason of his receiving the anointing directly from Jehovah himself, not with oil but with holy spirit, not to an earthly kingship but to a heavenly one combined with the office of heavenly High Priest.—Heb 1:9; Ps 45:7.
Like Jesus, his footstep followers who have been spirit begotten and anointed with holy spirit can be spoken of as anointed ones. (2Co 1:21) Just as Aaron was directly anointed as head of the priesthood, but his sons did not have the oil poured on their heads individually, so Jesus was anointed directly by Jehovah, and his congregation of spiritual brothers receive their anointing as a body of people through Jesus Christ. (Ac 2:1-4, 32, 33) They have thereby received an appointment from God to be kings and priests with Jesus Christ in the heavens. (2Co 5:5; Eph 1:13, 14; 1Pe 1:3, 4; Re 20:6) The apostle John indicated that the anointing by holy spirit that Christians receive teaches them. (1Jo 2:27) It commissions and qualifies them for the Christian ministry of the new covenant.—2Co 3:5, 6.
Jehovah has great love and concern for his anointed ones and watches over them carefully. (1Ch 16:22; Ps 2:2, 5; 20:6; 105:15; Lu 18:7) David recognized that God was the one who chose and appointed His anointed ones and that it was God who would judge them. To raise one’s hand to do harm to Jehovah’s anointed ones or any whom he appoints would bring Jehovah’s displeasure.—1Sa 24:6; 26:11, 23; see CHRIST; INSTALLATION; KING (Divinely appointed representatives); MESSIAH.
ANOINTED ONE
See CHRIST.
ANT
[Heb., nema·lah'].
A small but extremely numerous and widespread insect, living in colonies, and noted in the Bible for its industriousness and instinctive wisdom. (Pr 6:6-8; 30:24, 25) It is estimated that there are over 10,000 varieties of ants, these insects being found in all parts of the earth with the exception of the polar regions.
“A People.” The ants are called “a people” [Heb., ?am] in Proverbs 30:25, even as Joel referred to the locusts as “a nation” (Joe 1:6), and this expression is very suitable for these small creatures. While some ant colonies may contain only a few dozen ants, others have a huge population running into the hundreds of thousands. Although generally of moderate size, the nest or tunneled area may grow until it is as much as an acre in size. Within each colony there are three basic castes: the queen or queens, the males, and the workers (sexually undeveloped females). Yet, as the proverb states, the ant “has no commander, officer or ruler.” (Pr 6:7) The queen is not such in a governmental sense and more fittingly can be called the mother ant, for her essential function is that of egg laying. Whereas a queen ant may live as much as 15 years, the males live only long enough to mate and then die. The worker ants, whose life span may reach six years, have various duties to perform, such as searching for and gathering in food for the colony, feeding the queen, acting as nurses for the larvae, cleaning the nest, digging new chambers as expansion is needed, and defending the nest. Worker ants may be of different sizes and proportions, even within the same colony, in some cases the larger ones acting as soldiers in the event of invasion of the nest. Still, despite the fairly precise division of work (which in some colonies is arranged according to the age of the workers and in others according to size) and the relatively complex social organization existent, there is no sign of any superior officer, or taskmaster.
‘Instinctive Wisdom.’ The ‘wisdom’ of the ants is not the product of intelligent reasoning but results from the instincts with which they are endowed by their Creator. The Bible makes reference to the ant as ‘preparing its food in the summer and gathering its supplies in the harvest.’ (Pr 6:8) One of the most common varieties of ants found in Palestine, the harvester, or agricultural, ant (Messor semirufus), stores up a large supply of grain in the spring and summer and makes use of it in seasons, including winter, when the obtaining of food becomes difficult. This ant is often found in the vicinity of threshing floors, where seeds and grain are plentiful. If rain causes dampness to reach the stored seeds, the harvester ant will thereafter carry the grains out into the sun for drying. It is even known to bite off the germ part of the seed so that it will not germinate while stored. Colonies of harvester ants are made conspicuous by well-worn paths as well as by seed husks that are left outside the entrance.
Exemplary Characteristics. Thus, a brief investigation of the ant gives force to the exhortation: “Go to the ant, you lazy one; see its ways and become wise.” (Pr 6:6) Not only is their instinctive preparing for the future notable but also their persistence and determination, often carrying or tenaciously dragging objects weighing twice their own weight or more, doing everything possible to fulfill their particular task, and refusing to turn back even though they may fall, slide, or roll down some steep precipice. Remarkably cooperative, they keep their nests very clean and show concern for their fellow workers, at times assisting injured or exhausted ants back to the nest.
ANTELOPE
[Heb., di·shon'].
A cud-chewing animal and a splitter of the hoof, sole mention of which is made at Deuteronomy 14:5, where it is included in the list of animals permitted to the Israelites for food. There is uncertainty as to which animal is meant by the Hebrew word di·shon'.
The addax antelope (Addax nasomaculatus), still surviving in the desert regions of North Africa, is often suggested as corresponding to the di·shon' of the Hebrew Scriptures. This antelope measures about 1 m (40 in.) high at the shoulder. Its spreading, cloven hooves equip it admirably for travel in the loose sands of the desert, where it can survive without water for extremely long periods. The widespread horns of this animal are twisted like a screw, making from one and a half to nearly three turns, and measuring about 1 m (40 in.) along the curve. With the exception of the belly, tail, hindquarters, and facial markings, which always remain white, the color of the addax antelope becomes darker in winter, changing from a sandy color to brownish. Another possibility is the Arabian oryx (Oryx leucoryx), also a desert antelope.
ANTHOTHIJAH
(An·tho·thi'jah).
A son of Shashak of the tribe of Benjamin.—1Ch 8:24, 25.
ANTICHRIST
This word means “against (or instead of) Christ.” It occurs a total of five times, singular and plural, all of them in two of John’s epistles.
The subject was not new among the Christians when John wrote his letters (c. 98 C.E.). First John 2:18 states: “Young children, it is the last hour, and, just as you have heard that antichrist [Gr., an·ti'khri·stos] is coming, even now there have come to be many antichrists; from which fact we gain the knowledge that it is the last hour.” John’s statement shows that there are many individual antichrists, though all together they may form a composite person designated “the antichrist.” (2Jo 7) The use of the expression “hour” as referring to a period of time, either relatively brief or of undetermined length, is exemplified in other writings of John. (See Joh 2:4; 4:21-23; 5:25, 28; 7:30; 8:20; 12:23, 27.) He thus did not restrict the appearance, existence, and activity of such antichrist to some future time only but showed that the antichrist was then present and would continue on.—1Jo 4:3.
Identification. Although there has been much effort in the past to identify “the antichrist” with an individual, such as Pompey, Nero, or Muhammad (this latter person being suggested by Pope Innocent III in 1213 C.E.), or with a specific organization, as in the Protestant view of “the antichrist” as applying to the papacy, John’s inspired statements show the term to be broad in its application, embracing all those who deny that “Jesus is the Christ,” and who deny that Jesus is the Son of God who came “in the flesh.”—1Jo 2:22; 4:2, 3; 2Jo 7, NE, NIV; compare Joh 8:42, 48, 49; 9:22.
Denial of Jesus as the Christ and as the Son of God of necessity embraces the denial of any or all of the Scriptural teachings concerning him: his origin, his place in God’s arrangement, his fulfillment of the prophecies in the Hebrew Scriptures as the promised Messiah, his ministry and teachings and prophecies, as well as any opposition to or efforts to replace him in his position as God’s appointed High Priest and King. This is evident from other texts, which, while not using the term “antichrist,” express essentially the same idea. Thus, Jesus stated: “He that is not on my side is against me, and he that does not gather with me scatters.” (Lu 11:23) Second John 7 shows that such ones might act as deceivers, and hence the “antichrist” would include those who are “false Christs” and “false prophets,” as well as those who perform powerful works in Jesus’ name and yet are classed by him as “workers of lawlessness.”—Mt 24:24; 7:15, 22, 23.
In view of Jesus’ rule that what is done to his true followers is done to him (Mt 25:40, 45; Ac 9:5), the term must include those who persecute such ones, which means it would include the symbolic “Babylon the Great.”—Lu 21:12; Re 17:5, 6.
John specifically mentions apostates as among those of the antichrist by referring to those who “went out from us,” abandoning the Christian congregation. (1Jo 2:18, 19) It therefore includes “the man of lawlessness” or “son of destruction” described by Paul, as well as the “false teachers” Peter denounces for forming destructive sects and who “disown even the owner that bought them.”—2Th 2:3-5; 2Pe 2:1; see MAN OF LAWLESSNESS.
Kingdoms, nations, and organizations are similarly shown to be part of the antichrist in the symbolic description at Revelation 17:8-15; 19:19-21.—Compare Ps 2:1, 2.
In all the above cases those composing the antichrist are shown to be headed for eventual destruction as a recompense for their opposing course.
ANTI-LEBANON
(Anti-Leb'a·non).
The easternmost of the two ranges forming the mountain system of Lebanon. The Anti-Lebanon Range parallels the Lebanon Range for about 100 km (60 mi), extending from the plateau of Bashan, E of Dan, up to the great Plain of Emesa, not far from the site of Riblah. Between the two ranges lies a long valley formed by the Orontes and Litani rivers and called Coele-Syria (“Hollow Syria”) or the Beqa?.—Jos 11:17.
In the N the ridge is narrow and broken by a series of prominent peaks. The central mass is broader, higher, and rougher, while the southern zone is cut by long torrent valleys that lead off to the E and S. To the E of the main ridge there is a series of descending plateaus that gradually drop to the level of the Plains of Damascus. The southern zone includes Mount Hermon, which reaches 2,814 m (9,232 ft). The geology of these mountains is similar to that of the Lebanon Range, and they are composed mainly of limestone, having gray cliffs and round gray summits.
The Anti-Lebanon Range is evidently referred to in the Hebrew by the name “Amanah” at Song of Solomon 4:8, where it is mentioned in connection with Mount Hermon. While some have considered Amanah to be a particular mountain peak, it appears rather to refer either to the entire Anti-Lebanon Range or some part of it. The mountain ranges of “Libana” and “Ammanana” are mentioned jointly in inscriptions of Assyrian monarchs Tiglath-pileser III and Sennacherib. The Abanah River (modern Barada) is also called “Amanah” at 2 Kings 5:12 in the Syriac Peshitta and the Aramaic Targums, and this river, the principal one of Damascus, has its source in the southern part of the Anti-Lebanon mountains. Hence the name may refer either to that part of the range or to the range as a whole.
Since the major part of the Anti-Lebanon Range is not snowcapped, it has few rivers or streams. Little vegetation grows, but thin forests of dwarf oak and juniper trees are seen on various parts of the slopes. Few cedars remain today. The lower slopes still support vineyards, olive groves, and orchards, as they did in Bible times.
ANTIOCH
(An'ti·och).
1. The city of Antioch in Syria was founded by Seleucus I (Nicator) shortly after he and Generals Cassander and Lysimachus won the decisive battle of Ipsus in Phrygia, Asia Minor, in 301 B.C.E. He selected the site because of its military advantages and named it after his father Antiochus. At the location of what today is called Antakya in Turkey, Antioch was founded on the S side of the navigable Orontes River at a bend some 32 km (20 mi) from the Mediterranean Sea. It was so situated geographically that it could easily dominate the trade of all NW Syria that traversed the routes between the Euphrates River and the Mediterranean Sea. It soon became a commercial center, and its manufacture of luxury goods brought prosperity and wealth to the cosmopolitan city. As a seaport for Antioch, Seleucus also founded the coastal city of Seleucia, named after himself. Before he was assassinated in 281 B.C.E., he transferred his seat of government from Babylon to his new Syrian capital, Antioch, where the Seleucid dynasty of kings continued in power until 64 B.C.E., when Roman General Pompey made Syria a Roman province. Not only was Antioch made the capital of the Roman province of Syria but it also became the third-largest city in the empire, after Rome and Alexandria.
The physical structure of the city had been laid out according to the plan of Alexandria, with great colonnaded streets that intersected, lending impressive beauty to the splendor of the surrounding buildings. It was called “The Queen of the East,” “Antioch the Beautiful,” “The Third Metropolis of the Roman Empire,” and was unique in possessing a regular system of street lighting. Despite this outward show of beauty and industriousness, it gained a reputation for being morally corrupt because of the defiling practice of orgiastic rites in the name of religion. Juvenal said that ‘the Orontes River had flowed into the Tiber River flooding Rome with the superstition and immorality of the East.’—Juvenal and Persius, Satire III, 62-65.
Biblical Connections and Later History. Josephus records that the Seleucids encouraged Jews to settle in Antioch and gave them full citizenship rights, thus establishing a sizable Jewish population. The first mention of Antioch in the Bible is in connection with Nicolaus from Antioch, who became a Christian after becoming a proselyte to the Jewish religion. (Ac 6:5) Direct Christian activity began there when some of the disciples were scattered as far as Antioch by the tribulation that arose following Stephen’s death. (Ac 11:19, 20) When the congregation at Jerusalem heard that many Greek-speaking people were becoming believers, they dispatched Barnabas as far as Antioch, and when he observed the thriving interest manifested there, he brought Paul in from Tarsus to help. (Ac 11:21-26) They both dwelt there for a year teaching the people, and Paul thereafter used Antioch as a home base for his missionary tours. It was in Antioch that, by divine providence, the disciples were first called “Christians.” (Ac 11:26) The generosity of the congregation was expressed when they sent a relief ministration (Ac 11:29) by the hands of Paul and Barnabas to the governing body in Jerusalem about 46 C.E. This coincided with a great famine occurring in the time of Claudius, as prophesied by Agabus. (Ac 11:27, 28) After they returned to Antioch, the holy spirit directed that Paul and Barnabas be set aside for special work, so they were sent on Paul’s first missionary tour, about 47-48 C.E. Before he started on his second missionary tour and while he was in Antioch, the matter of circumcision for Gentiles arose in about 49 C.E., and the decree of the governing body at Jerusalem was delivered by Paul and Barnabas to the congregation at Antioch. (Ac 15:13-35) Paul’s second missionary journey, about 49-52 C.E., likewise began and ended at Antioch, and here also was where Paul corrected Peter’s compromising action of discriminating between Jews and Gentiles.—Ga 2:11, 12.
2. Antioch in Pisidia was also founded by Seleucus I (Nicator) and named in honor of his father, Antiochus. The ruins of the city are located near Yalvac in modern Turkey. (PICTURE, Vol. 2, p. 748) It was situated on the border of Phrygia and Pisidia and so might be considered part of one or the other of these provinces at different times. Thus, Greek geographer Strabo refers to it as a city of Phrygia toward Pisidia (Geography, 12, VIII, 13, 14), but, as Funk and Wagnalls New Standard Bible Dictionary (1936, p. 51) observes, “the majority of writers speak of it as Pisidian,” even as did Luke. This identification served to distinguish it from Antioch in Syria. (See PISIDIA.) Because of its location, Antioch in Pisidia became part of the trade route between Cilicia and Ephesus and contained a mixed population including many Jews, who had established a synagogue there. It was a thoroughly Hellenized Greek-speaking city. Paul twice visited it with Barnabas on his first evangelistic journey about 47-48 C.E. and preached in the synagogue, finding much interest. (Ac 13:14; 14:19-23) However, becoming jealous of the crowds that were attending, certain Jews stirred up some of the leading men and women of the city and threw Paul and Barnabas outside.—Ac 13:45, 50; 2Ti 3:11.
ANTIPAS
(An'ti·pas) [shortened form of Antipater, meaning “Instead of [His] Father”].
1. A martyr of the early Christian congregation at Pergamum in the first century C.E.—Re 2:12, 13; see PERGAMUM.
2. Herod Antipas, son of Herod the Great.—See HEROD No. 2.
ANTIPATRIS
(An·tip'a·tris) [Of (Belonging to) Antipater].
A city rebuilt by Herod the Great in 9 B.C.E. and named after his father Antipater (II). It is identified with Ras el-?Ain (Tel Afeq) in a well-watered and fertile section of the Plain of Sharon. Antipatris is believed to have been the location of the earlier city of Aphek, mentioned at 1 Samuel 4:1. Excavations conducted there in 1946, 1961, and 1974 appear to confirm this.—See APHEK No. 3.
It was to here that the main body of the Roman army escort conducted Paul, traveling some 50 km (30 mi) down the mountains from Jerusalem by night. (Ac 23:31) The place lay at the junction of the Roman military roads leading from Jerusalem and Lydda respectively to the Roman capital of Caesarea. From Antipatris the 70 cavalrymen took Paul the remaining distance of some 40 km (25 mi) across the plain to Caesarea.
ANTONIA, TOWER OF
A fortified structure in Jerusalem, serving as soldiers’ quarters. According to Josephus, it had apartments, baths, barracks, and courtyards.—PICTURE, Vol. 2, p. 535.
The Tower of Antonia was situated at the NW corner of the temple court and evidently occupied the site where Nehemiah earlier had constructed the Castle (or fortress) mentioned at Nehemiah 2:8. Herod the Great did extensive and costly repair work on it and increased its fortifications. Previously known as the Baris, Herod named it Antonia in honor of Mark Antony. As the Jewish high priest and ruler John Hyrcanus had done before him, Herod had the priestly garments kept there, apparently as a means of maintaining a certain check or control on the high priest.
According to Josephus, the fortress was built on a rocky eminence 50 cubits (c. 22 m; 73 ft) high. Above the rock, it had stone walls 40 cubits (c. 18 m; 58 ft) high and four corner towers, three of them 50 cubits (c. 22 m; 73 ft) high and the other, at the southeast corner overlooking the whole temple area, 70 cubits (c. 31 m; 102 ft) high. (The Jewish War, V, 238-247 [v, 8]) Prior to Herod’s time the fortress served primarily against incursions from the N, but thereafter it mainly served as a point of control over the Jews and a means of policing the activities in the temple area, to which there was direct access from the fortress.
The square layout of the fortress would indicate that it had a central court. Some believe that it was in such a central court within this tower that Jesus appeared before Pilate for judgment. (Joh 19:13) They suggest that a stone pavement found in this area was the one referred to as “Gabbatha.” Others, however, believe that Jesus’ judgment by Pilate took place before Herod’s palace.—See STONE PAVEMENT.
A more certain reference to the Tower of Antonia is that recorded in the account at Acts 21:30-40 and 22:24. Paul appears to have delivered his defense and witness to a religious mob from the steps of the fortress and thereafter was taken into the soldiers’ quarters for examining. Probably Paul was returned to this place after his stormy session with the Sanhedrin and was here when his nephew came to warn him of the conspiracy against his life.—Ac 23:10, 16.
The Tower of Antonia came to final ruin when it was destroyed along with the temple and city by Roman General Titus in 70 C.E.
ANUB
(A'nub).
A descendant of Judah and son of Koz.—1Ch 4:1, 8.
ANXIETY
A number of Hebrew words convey the sense of anxiety or worry. One of these (tsa·rar') means to be confined in a physical sense and is thus rendered ‘wrap up,’ ‘shut up,’ and ‘be cramped.’ (Ex 12:34; Pr 26:8; Isa 49:19) In a figurative sense it means “grow anxious; be in sore straits.” (Ge 32:7; 1Sa 28:15) Another is da·'agh', rendered “become anxious; become frightened”; it is related to de'a·ghah', meaning “anxious care.” (1Sa 9:5; Isa 57:11; Pr 12:25) The Greek noun me'ri·mna is rendered “anxiety,” while the related verb me·ri·mna'o means “be anxious.”—Mt 13:22; Lu 12:22.
Anxiety can be damaging to one’s well-being. It can lead to depression, robbing one of strength and the initiative to act. Says the inspired proverb: “Anxious care in the heart of a man is what will cause it to bow down.” (Pr 12:25) There can be serious physical manifestations from worry. Observes the book How to Master Your Nerves: “Doctors know how anxiety can affect the body’s functions. It can raise (or lower) blood pressure; it can elevate the white blood cell count; it can suddenly affect the blood sugar by the action of adrenalin on the liver. It can even change your electrocardiogram. Dr. Charles Mayo said: ‘Worry affects the circulation, the heart, the glands, the whole nervous system.’”—By Drs. P. Steincrohn and D. LaFia, 1970, p. 14.
Far more serious is the spiritual harm to which undue anxiety may lead. Jesus Christ indicated that appreciation for “the word of God” can be completely choked out by worry over the problems that are often part of life in the present system of things. Just as thorns can stop seedlings from reaching maturity and bearing fruit, so such anxiety can prevent spiritual development and the bearing of fruitage to God’s praise. (Mt 13:22; Mr 4:18, 19; Lu 8:7, 11, 14) Because of having permitted these worries to dominate their lives, to the exclusion of spiritual interests, many will find themselves in a disapproved state before the Son of God upon his return in glory, to their everlasting loss.—Lu 21:34-36.
Proper Anxieties or Concerns. It is right to be anxious about doing what is pleasing to Jehovah God in order not to miss out on the blessings to be enjoyed by his devoted servants. One guilty of serious wrongdoing should feel as did the psalmist: “I began to be anxious over my sin.” (Ps 38:18) A proper concern over sin leads to confession, repentance, and turning around from the wrong course, restoring a good relationship with the Most High.
All Christians should be anxious, or should truly care, about the spiritual, physical, and material welfare of fellow believers. (1Co 12:25-27) This kind of concern is reflected in the apostle John’s letter to Gaius: “Beloved one, I pray that in all things you may be prospering and having good health, just as your soul is prospering.” (3Jo 2) The apostle Paul spoke of “the anxiety for all the congregations.” (2Co 11:28) He was deeply concerned that all remain faithful disciples of the Son of God to the end.
The Scriptures refer to being “anxious for the things of the Lord,” that is, concerned for everything that will promote the interests of the Son of God. Free from the responsibilities and cares for a mate and children, single Christians are in a better position than are married people to minimize concern over “the things of the world” and so give greater attention to “the things of the Lord.”—1Co 7:32-35.
The apostle Paul wrote that Christian husbands and wives would be “anxious for the things of the world,” having distractions not shared by single Christians. In the case of an unmarried person, what may be ample for personal and home care and life’s necessities—food, clothing, shelter—may fall far short of what is needed for a family. Because of the intimate relationship of husband and wife, both are rightly anxious or concerned about pleasing each other in providing that which will contribute to the physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual welfare of the entire family. Even without having to contend with sickness, emergencies, limitations, or handicaps, married couples with children are required to devote much more time to “things of the world,” that is, to nonspiritual activities related to human life, than would usually be true of single Christians.
Still, mundane concerns should not be permitted to take on too much importance. Jesus Christ made this clear to Lazarus’ sister Martha. Anxious about the entertainment of her guest, she could not see how it was possible to take time to listen to Jesus. Mary, on the other hand, was able to choose “the good portion,” the receiving of spiritual nourishment from God’s Son.—Lu 10:38-42.
Avoiding Undue Anxiety. Implicit trust in Jehovah’s loving concern for the welfare of his servants can help one to avoid giving in to needless worry. (Jer 17:7, 8) Jesus Christ made the same observation in his Sermon on the Mount. He concluded his counsel regarding anxiety with the words: “Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Sufficient for each day is its own badness.” (Mt 6:25-34) For a Christian, there are enough problems each day without one’s adding to them by anxiety over what might happen the next day and may, in fact, never take place.
Even if a Christian is brought before interrogating authorities in times of persecution, his trust in God’s help can liberate him from anxiety. By means of His spirit, Jehovah will sustain the Christian in this trialsome situation and make it possible for him to bear witness in a fine way.—Mt 10:18-20; Lu 12:11, 12.
Whenever a Christian is assailed by anything that could make him anxious, filling him with uneasiness and apprehension, he should turn to his heavenly Father in prayer. Thus he can ‘throw his anxiety on Jehovah,’ confident that he will be heard by the One who cares for him. (1Pe 5:7) The result will be an inner calm, the peace of God, that will guard the heart and the mental powers. Deep within himself, in his heart, the Christian will be freed from uneasiness, foreboding, and alarm, and the mind will not be unsettled by the distractions and perplexities resulting from anxiety.—Php 4:6, 7.
APE
[Heb., qohph].
The apes imported by King Solomon may have been a species of long-tailed monkeys referred to by ancient writers as being native to Ethiopia. (1Ki 10:22; 2Ch 9:21) The fact that the Hebrew word qohph may be related to the Sanskrit word kapi and that peacocks are considered to be native to SE Asia has given rise to the conclusion that the apes were brought by Solomon’s fleet from India or Sri Lanka. However, the imported items need not necessarily have come directly from the country of origin nor from the same land, in view of the indications that commercial intercourse existed between India and Africa even before Solomon’s time.—See PEACOCK; TARSHISH No. 4.
APELLES
(A·pel'les).
A Christian in the congregation at Rome to whom Paul sent greetings as “the approved one in Christ.”—Ro 16:10; compare 2Co 10:18; 2Ti 2:15.
APHEK
(A'phek) [Streambed].
1. A town evidently N of Sidon mentioned to Joshua by Jehovah as among the places yet to be conquered. (Jos 13:4) It is presently identified with Afaka (modern Afqa) about 39 km (24 mi) ENE of Beirut. It lies at the source of the Nahr Ibrahim, anciently known as the river Adonis, which flows down to Byblos on the Mediterranean Coast.
2. A town within the territory of Asher but which the tribe was unsuccessful in possessing. (Jos 19:24, 30) It is called Aphik at Judges 1:31. It has been identified with Tell Kurdaneh (Tel Afeq), about 8 km (5 mi) SSE of Acco.
3. A city that, on the basis of the cities mentioned with it, was evidently in the Plain of Sharon. Its king was among those slain by Joshua. (Jos 12:18) Centuries later, but prior to Saul’s kingship, the Philistines encamped here before their victory over Israel, drawn up at nearby Ebenezer. (1Sa 4:1) Its location is considered to be at Ras el-?Ain (Tel Afeq; different from No. 2 above) at the source of the Yarkon River. Aphek is mentioned in Egyptian and Assyrian texts. It is believed that the town of Antipatris, mentioned at Acts 23:31, was built at the site of ancient Aphek. Josephus mentions “a tower called Apheku” in connection with Antipatris. (The Jewish War, II, 513 [xix, 1]) Shiloh, from which the Israelites brought the ark of the covenant, is about 35 km (22 mi) to the E.
4. A town apparently located in the Plain of Jezreel between the towns of Shunem and Jezreel. In the battle between the Philistines and the Israelites that resulted in King Saul’s death, the original position of the Philistines was at Shunem, while the Israelites took a position on Mount Gilboa. (1Sa 28:4) The account thereafter indicates that the Philistines advanced to Aphek while Israel descended to the spring at Jezreel. At Aphek the axis lords of the Philistines now reviewed their marshaled forces and discovered David and his men accompanying Achish in the rear. David’s forces were ordered to leave on the following morning, and then the Philistines advanced to the battle site at Jezreel. (1Sa 29:1-11) From there they pushed the defeated Israelites back up into Mount Gilboa, where the slaughter was completed and Saul and his three sons died.—1Sa 31:1-8.
Some scholars suggest that the events leading up to this battle are not written in chronological order and, therefore, identify this Aphek with the one in the Plain of Sharon. (See APHEK No. 3.) Yohanan Aharoni favors this view, stating: “The narrative of this war has been truncated to some degree by the insertion of the story about David. But one can still follow its general line. The Philistine rulers assembled their forces at Aphek at the sources of the Yarkon (1 Sam. 29.1) preparatory to marching on Jezreel (vs. 11). Saul’s troops ‘were encamped by the fountain which is in Jezreel’ (vs. 1); on the eve of the battle they ranged themselves on Mount Gilboa. The Philistines made camp across from them at Shunem (1 Sam. 28.4). The conflict ended in Philistine victory, while Saul and his three sons fell during the retreat at Gilboa.”—The Land of the Bible, translated and edited by A. Rainey, 1979, pp. 290, 291.
5. A city mentioned at 1 Kings 20:26 as the site of the defeat of the Syrian Ben-hadad II. The retreating Syrians pulled back to the city, only to have its wall fall upon 27,000 of them. (1Ki 20:29, 30) It likewise seems to be the place prophetically indicated to King Jehoash by the dying prophet Elisha as the point where the Syrians would suffer future defeats at the hands of Israelites. (2Ki 13:17-19, 25) Some scholars would place the Aphek mentioned in these texts about 5 km (3 mi) E of the Sea of Galilee, where the modern village of Afiq or Fiq is found. However, so far no remains older than the fourth century B.C.E. have been found at the site. But at nearby ?En Gev on the shore of the Sea of Galilee remains of a large fortified city of the tenth to eighth centuries B.C.E. have been discovered.
APHEKAH
(A·phe'kah) [Streambed].
A city in the mountainous region of southern Judah, mentioned as in the neighborhood of Hebron. (Jos 15:48, 53, 54) Some scholars propose identifying it with Khirbet el-Hadab, about 6 km (3.5 mi) SW of Hebron. There are two water sources nearby, and archaeological remains of the Israelite period have been found at the site.
APHIAH
(A·phi'ah).
A Benjamite and one of King Saul’s ancestors.—1Sa 9:1, 2.
APHIK
See APHEK No. 2.
APHRAH
(Aph'rah) [probably, Dust].
A place mentioned by Micah (1:10) apparently in the Shephelah or the Plains of Philistia, according to the other towns mentioned in the context. Micah evidently makes a play on words in saying: “In the house of Aphrah [Heb., ?Aph·rah'] wallow in the very dust [Heb., ?a·phar'].”
APOCRYPHA
(A·poc'ry·pha).
The Greek word a·po'kry·phos is used in its original sense in three Bible texts as referring to things “carefully concealed.” (Mr 4:22; Lu 8:17; Col 2:3) As applied to writings, it originally referred to those not read publicly, hence “concealed” from others. Later, however, the word took on the meaning of spurious or uncanonical, and today is used most commonly to refer to the additional writings declared part of the Bible canon by the Roman Catholic Church at the Council of Trent (1546). Catholic writers refer to these books as deuterocanonical, meaning “of the second (or later) canon,” as distinguished from protocanonical.
These additional writings are Tobit, Judith, Wisdom (of Solomon), Ecclesiasticus (not Ecclesiastes), Baruch, 1 and 2 Maccabees, supplements to Esther, and three additions to Daniel: The Song of the Three Holy Children, Susanna and the Elders, and The Destruction of Bel and the Dragon. The exact time of their being written is uncertain, but the evidence points to a time no earlier than the second or third century B.C.E.
Evidence Against Canonicity. While in some cases they have certain historical value, any claim for canonicity on the part of these writings is without any solid foundation. The evidence points to a closing of the Hebrew canon following the writing of the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Malachi in the fifth century B.C.E. The Apocryphal writings were never included in the Jewish canon of inspired Scriptures and do not form part of it today.
The first-century Jewish historian Josephus shows the recognition given only to those few books (of the Hebrew canon) viewed as sacred, stating: “We do not possess myriads of inconsistent books, conflicting with each other. Our books, those which are justly accredited, are but two and twenty [the equivalent of the 39 books of the Hebrew Scriptures according to modern division], and contain the record of all time.” He thereafter clearly shows an awareness of the existence of Apocryphal books and their exclusion from the Hebrew canon by adding: “From Artaxerxes to our own time the complete history has been written, but has not been deemed worthy of equal credit with the earlier records, because of the failure of the exact succession of the prophets.”—Against Apion, I, 38, 41 (8).
Inclusion in “Septuagint.” Arguments in favor of the canonicity of the writings generally revolve around the fact that these Apocryphal writings are to be found in many early copies of the Greek Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, which translation was begun in Egypt about 280 B.C.E. However, since no original copies of the Septuagint are extant, it cannot be stated categorically that the Apocryphal books were originally included in that work. Many, perhaps most, of the Apocryphal writings were admittedly written after the commencement of the translation work of the Septuagint and so were obviously not on the original list of books selected for translation by the translating body. At best, then, they could rate only as accretions to that work.
Additionally, while the Greek-speaking Jews of Alexandria eventually inserted such Apocryphal writings into the Greek Septuagint and apparently viewed them as part of an enlarged canon of sacred writings, the statement by Josephus quoted earlier shows that they were never brought into the Jerusalem or Palestinian canon and were, at the most, viewed as only secondary writings and not of divine origin. Thus, the Jewish Council of Jamnia (about 90 C.E.) specifically excluded all such writings from the Hebrew canon.
The need for giving due consideration to the Jewish stand in this matter is clearly stated by the apostle Paul at Romans 3:1, 2.
Additional ancient testimony. One of the chief external evidences against the canonicity of the Apocrypha is the fact that none of the Christian Bible writers quoted from these books. While this of itself is not conclusive, inasmuch as their writings are also lacking in quotations from a few books recognized as canonical, such as Esther, Ecclesiastes, and The Song of Solomon, yet the fact that not one of the writings of the Apocrypha is quoted even once is certainly significant.
Not without weight also is the fact that leading Bible scholars and “church fathers” of the first centuries of the Common Era, on the whole, gave the Apocrypha an inferior position. Origen, of the early third century C.E., as a result of careful investigation made such a distinction between these writings and those of the true canon. Athanasius, Cyril of Jerusalem, Gregory of Nazianzus, and Amphilocius, all of the fourth century C.E., prepared catalogs listing the sacred writings in accord with the Hebrew canon and either ignored these additional writings or placed them in a secondary class.
Jerome, who is described as “the best Hebrew scholar” of the early church and who completed the Latin Vulgate in 405 C.E., took a definite stand against such Apocryphal books and was the first, in fact, to use the word “Apocrypha” explicitly in the sense of noncanonical as referring to these writings. Thus, in his prologue to the books of Samuel and Kings, Jerome lists the inspired books of the Hebrew Scriptures in harmony with the Hebrew canon (in which the 39 books are grouped as 22) and then says: “Thus there are twenty-two books . . . This prologue of the Scriptures can serve as a fortified approach to all the books which we translate from the Hebrew into Latin; so that we may know that whatever is beyond these must be put in the apocrypha.” In writing to a lady named Laeta on the education of her daughter, Jerome counseled: “Let her avoid all the apocryphal books, and if she ever wishes to read them, not for the truth of their doctrines but out of respect for their wondrous tales, let her realize that they are not really written by those to whom they are ascribed, that there are many faulty elements in them, and that it requires great skill to look for gold in mud.”—Select Letters, CVII.
Differing Catholic views. The trend toward including these additional writings as canonical was primarily initiated by Augustine (354-430 C.E.), although even he in later works acknowledged that there was a definite distinction between the books of the Hebrew canon and such “outside books.” However, the Catholic Church, following Augustine’s lead, included such additional writings in the canon of sacred books determined by the Council of Carthage in 397 C.E. It was, however, not until as late as 1546 C.E., at the Council of Trent, that the Roman Catholic Church definitely confirmed its acceptance of these additions into its catalog of Bible books, and this action was deemed necessary because, even within the church, opinion was still divided over these writings. John Wycliffe, the Roman Catholic priest and scholar who, with the subsequent help of Nicholas of Hereford, in the 14th century made the first translation of the Bible into English, did include the Apocrypha in his work, but in the preface to this translation declared such writings to be “without authority of belief.” Dominican Cardinal Cajetan, foremost Catholic theologian of his time (1469-1534 C.E.) and called by Clement VII the “lamp of the Church,” also differentiated between the books of the true Hebrew canon and the Apocryphal works, appealing to the writings of Jerome as an authority.
It is to be noted as well that the Council of Trent did not accept all the writings previously approved by the earlier Council of Carthage but dropped three of these: the Prayer of Manasses and 1 and 2 Esdras (not the 1 and 2 Esdras that, in the Catholic Douay Bible, correspond with Ezra and Nehemiah). Thus, these three writings that had appeared for over 1,100 years in the approved Latin Vulgate were now excluded.
Internal evidence. The internal evidence of these Apocryphal writings weighs even more heavily against their canonicity than does the external. They are completely lacking in the prophetic element. Their contents and teachings at times contradict those of the canonical books and are also contradictory within themselves. They are rife with historical and geographic inaccuracies and anachronisms. The writers in some cases are guilty of dishonesty in falsely representing their works as those of earlier inspired writers. They show themselves to be under pagan Greek influence, and at times resort to an extravagance of language and literary style wholly foreign to the inspired Scriptures. Two of the writers imply that they were not inspired. (See the Prologue to Ecclesiasticus; 2 Maccabees 2:24-32; 15:38-40, Dy.) Thus, it may be said that the best evidence against the canonicity of the Apocrypha is the Apocrypha itself. A consideration of the individual books here follows:
Tobit (Tobias). The account of a pious Jew of the tribe of Naphtali who is deported to Nineveh and who becomes blinded by having bird’s dung fall in both of his eyes. He sends his son, Tobias, to Media to collect a debt, and Tobias is led by an angel, impersonating a human, to Ecbatana (Rages, according to some versions). En route he acquires the heart, liver, and gall of a fish. He encounters a widow who, though married seven times, remains a virgin because of each husband’s having been killed on the marriage night by Asmodeus, the evil spirit. Encouraged by the angel, Tobias marries the widowed virgin, and by burning the fish’s heart and liver, he drives away the demon. Upon returning home he restores his father’s sight by use of the gall of the fish.
The story was probably written originally in Aramaic and is estimated to be of about the third century B.C.E. It is obviously not inspired by God because of the superstition and error found in the narrative. Among the inaccuracies it contains is this: The account states that in his youth Tobit saw the revolt of the northern tribes, which occurred in 997 B.C.E. after Solomon’s death (Tobit 1:4, 5, JB), also that he was later deported to Nineveh with the tribe of Naphtali, in 740 B.C.E. (Tobias 1:11-13, Dy) That would mean that he lived more than 257 years. Yet Tobias 14:1-3 (Dy) says he was 102 years old at the time of his death.
Judith. This is the account of a beautiful Jewish widow of the city of “Bethulia.” Nebuchadnezzar sends his officer Holofernes on a campaign to the W to destroy all worship except that of Nebuchadnezzar himself. The Jews are besieged in Bethulia, but Judith pretends to be a traitoress to the Jews’ cause and is admitted to the camp of Holofernes, where she gives him a false report of the conditions in the city. At a feast, in which Holofernes becomes drunk, she is able to behead him with his own sword and then return to Bethulia with his head. The following morning the enemy camp is thrown into confusion, and the Jews gain complete victory.
As the Catholic translation The Jerusalem Bible comments in its Introduction to the Books of Tobit, Judith and Esther: “The book of Judith in particular shows a bland indifference to history and geography.” Among the inconsistencies pointed out in that introduction is this: The events are stated as occurring during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, who is called the king “who reigned over the Assyrians in the great city of Nineveh.” (Judith 1:1, 7 [1:5, 10, Dy]) The introduction and footnotes of this translation point out that Nebuchadnezzar was king of Babylonia and never reigned in Nineveh, since Nineveh had been destroyed earlier by Nebuchadnezzar’s father Nabopolassar.
Concerning the traveling itinerary of the army of Holofernes, this Introduction states that it is “a geographical impossibility.” The Illustrated Bible Dictionary (Vol. 1, p. 76) comments: “The story is frank fiction—otherwise its inexactitudes would be incredible.”—Edited by J. D. Douglas, 1980.
The book is thought to have been written in Palestine during the Greek period toward the end of the second century or the start of the first century B.C.E. It is believed to have been originally written in Hebrew.
Additions to the Book of Esther. These form six additional passages. Preceding the first chapter in some ancient Greek and Latin texts (but Es 11:2–12:6 in Dy) is the first portion, of 17 verses, presenting a dream of Mordecai and his exposing a conspiracy against the king. Following 3:13 (but 13:1-7 in Dy) the second addition presents the text of the king’s edict against the Jews. At the close of chapter 4 (but 13:8–14:19 in Dy) prayers by Mordecai and Esther are related as the third addition. The fourth is made to follow 5:2 (but 15:1-19 in Dy) and recounts Esther’s audience with the king. The fifth comes after 8:12 (but 16:1-24 in Dy) and consists of the king’s edict allowing the Jews to defend themselves. At the close of the book (but 10:4–11:1 in Dy) the dream presented in the Apocryphal introduction is interpreted.
The placement of these additions varies in different translations, some placing them all at the end of the book (as did Jerome in his translation) and others interspersing them throughout the canonical text.
In the first of these Apocryphal sections Mordecai is presented as having been among the captives taken by Nebuchadnezzar, in 617 B.C.E., and as being an important man in the king’s court in the second year of Ahasuerus (Gr. says Artaxerxes) over a century later. This statement that Mordecai occupied such an important position so early in the king’s reign contradicts the canonical part of Esther. The Apocryphal additions are believed to be the work of an Egyptian Jew and to have been written during the second century B.C.E.
Wisdom (of Solomon). This is a treatise extolling the benefits to those seeking divine wisdom. Wisdom is personified as a celestial woman, and Solomon’s prayer for wisdom is included in the text. The latter part reviews the history from Adam to the conquest of Canaan, drawing upon it for examples of blessings for wisdom and calamities for lack of it. The folly of image worship is discussed.
Though not mentioning him directly by name, in certain texts the book presents Solomon as its author. (Wisdom 9:7, 8, 12) But the book cites passages from Bible books written centuries after Solomon’s death (c. 998 B.C.E.) and does so from the Greek Septuagint, which began to be translated about 280 B.C.E. The writer is believed to have been a Jew in Alexandria, Egypt, who wrote about the middle of the first century B.C.E.
The writer manifests a strong reliance on Greek philosophy. He employs Platonic terminology in advancing the doctrine of the immortality of the human soul. (Wisdom 2:23; 3:2, 4) Other pagan concepts presented are the preexistence of human souls and the view of the body as an impediment or hindrance to the soul. (8:19, 20; 9:15) The presentation of the historical events from Adam to Moses is embellished with many fanciful details, often at variance with the canonical record.
While some reference works endeavor to show certain correspondencies between passages from this Apocryphal writing and the later works of the Christian Greek Scriptures, the similarity is often slight and, even where somewhat stronger, would not indicate any drawing upon this Apocryphal work by the Christian writers but, rather, their drawing upon the canonical Hebrew Scriptures, which the Apocryphal writer also employed.
Ecclesiasticus. This book, also called The Wisdom of Jesus, the Son of Sirach, has the distinction of being the longest of the Apocryphal books and the only one whose author is known, Jesus ben-Sirach of Jerusalem. The writer expounds upon the nature of wisdom and its application for a successful life. Observance of the Law is strongly emphasized. Counsel on many areas of social conduct and daily life is given, including comments on table manners, dreams, and travel. The concluding portion contains a review of important personages of Israel, ending with the high priest Simon II.
Contradicting Paul’s statement at Romans 5:12-19, which places the responsibility for sin upon Adam, Ecclesiasticus says: “From the woman came the beginning of sin, and by her we all die.” (25:33, Dy) The writer also prefers “any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman.”—25:19, Dy.
The book was originally written in Hebrew in the early part of the second century B.C.E. Quotations from it are found in the Jewish Talmud.
Baruch (Including the Epistle of Jeremias). The first five chapters of the book are made to appear as though they were written by Jeremiah’s friend and scribe, Baruch; the sixth chapter is presented as a letter written by Jeremiah (Jeremias) himself. The book relates the expressions of repentance and prayers for relief on the part of the exiled Jews in Babylon, exhortations to follow wisdom, encouragement to hope in the promise of deliverance, and the denunciation of Babylonish idolatry.
Baruch is represented as being in Babylon (Baruch 1:1, 2), whereas the Bible record shows he went to Egypt, as did Jeremiah, and there is no evidence that Baruch was ever in Babylon. (Jer 43:5-7) Contrary to Jeremiah’s prophecy that the desolation of Judah during the Babylonian exile would last 70 years (Jer 25:11, 12; 29:10), Baruch 6:2 tells the Jews that they will be in Babylon for seven generations and then experience release.
Jerome, in his preface to the book of Jeremiah, states: “I have not thought it worth while to translate the book of Baruch.” The introduction to the book in The Jerusalem Bible (p. 1128) suggests that sections of the composition may have been written as late as the second or first century B.C.E.; hence by an author (or authors) other than Baruch. The original language was probably Hebrew.
The Song of the Three Holy Children. This addition to Daniel is made to follow Daniel 3:23. It consists of 67 verses presenting a prayer supposedly uttered by Azariah within the fiery furnace, followed by an account of an angel’s putting out the fiery blaze, and finally a song sung by the three Hebrews inside the furnace. The song is quite similar to Psalm 148. Its references to the temple, priests, and cherubim, however, do not fit the time to which it alleges to conform. It may have been originally written in Hebrew and is considered to be of the first century B.C.E.
Susanna and the Elders. This short story relates an incident in the life of the beautiful wife of Joakim, a wealthy Jew in Babylon. While bathing, Susanna is approached by two Jewish elders who urge her to commit adultery with them and, upon her refusal, frame a false charge against her. At the trial she is sentenced to die, but youthful Daniel adroitly exposes the two elders, and Susanna is cleared of the charge. The original language is uncertain. It is considered to have been written during the first century B.C.E. In the Greek Septuagint it was placed before the canonical book of Daniel, and in the Latin Vulgate it was placed after it. Some versions include it as a 13th chapter of Daniel.
The Destruction of Bel and the Dragon. This is a third addition to Daniel, some versions placing it as a 14th chapter. In the account King Cyrus requires of Daniel that he worship an idol of the god Bel. By sprinkling ashes on the floor of the temple and thus detecting footprints, Daniel proves that the food supposedly eaten by the idol is really consumed by the pagan priests and their families. The priests are killed, and Daniel smashes the idol. Daniel is asked by the king to worship a living dragon. Daniel destroys the dragon but is thrown into the lions’ den by the enraged populace. During the seven days of his confinement, an angel picks up Habakkuk by his hair and carries him and a bowl of stew from Judea to Babylon to provide Daniel with food. Habakkuk is then returned to Judea, Daniel is released from the den, and his opponents are thrown in and devoured. This addition is also considered to be from the first century B.C.E. These additions to Daniel are referred to in The Illustrated Bible Dictionary (Vol. 1, p. 76) as “pious legendary embroidery.”
First Maccabees. A historical account of the Jewish struggle for independence during the second century B.C.E., from the beginning of Antiochus Epiphanes’ reign (175 B.C.E.) to the death of Simon Maccabaeus (c. 134 B.C.E.). It deals particularly with the exploits of priest Mattathias and his sons, Judas, Jonathan, and Simon, in their battles with the Syrians.
This is the most valuable of the Apocryphal works because of the historical information it supplies for this period. However, as The Jewish Encyclopedia (1976, Vol. VIII, p. 243) comments, in it “history is written from the human standpoint.” Like the other Apocryphal works, it did not form part of the inspired Hebrew canon. It was evidently written in Hebrew about the latter part of the second century B.C.E.
Second Maccabees. Though placed after First Maccabees, this account relates to part of the same time period (c. 180 B.C.E. to 160 B.C.E.) but was not written by the author of First Maccabees. The writer presents the book as a summary of the previous works of a certain Jason of Cyrene. It describes the persecutions of the Jews under Antiochus Epiphanes, the plundering of the temple, and its subsequent rededication.
The account represents Jeremiah, at the destruction of Jerusalem, as carrying the tabernacle and the ark of the covenant to a cave in the mountain from which Moses viewed the land of Canaan. (2 Maccabees 2:1-16) The tabernacle had, of course, been replaced by the temple some 420 years previously.
Various texts are employed in Catholic dogma as support for doctrines such as punishment after death (2 Maccabees 6:26), intercession by the saints (15:12-16), and the propriety of prayers for the dead (12:41-46, Dy).
In its Introduction to the Books of Maccabees, The Jerusalem Bible says concerning Second Maccabees: “The style is that of hellenistic writers, though not of the best: at times it is turgid, frequently pompous.” The writer of Second Maccabees makes no pretense of writing under divine inspiration and devotes part of the second chapter to justifying his choice of the particular method used in handling the subject material. (2 Maccabees 2:24-32, JB) He concludes his work by saying: “Here, then, I will make an end of writing; if it has been done workmanly, and in historian’s fashion, none better pleased than I; if it is of little merit, I must be humoured none the less.”—2 Maccabees 15:38, 39, Kx.
The book was evidently written in Greek sometime between 134 B.C.E. and the fall of Jerusalem in 70 C.E.
Later Apocryphal Works. Particularly from the second century C.E. forward there has developed an immense body of writings making claim to divine inspiration and canonicity and pretending to relate to the Christian faith. Frequently referred to as the “Apocryphal New Testament,” these writings represent efforts at imitating the Gospels, Acts, letters, and the revelations contained in the canonical books of the Christian Greek Scriptures. A large number of these are known only through fragments extant or by quotations from them or allusions to them by other writers.
These writings manifest an attempt to provide information that the inspired writings deliberately omit, such as the activities and events relating to Jesus’ life from his early childhood on up to the time of his baptism, or an effort to manufacture support for doctrines or traditions that find no basis in the Bible or are in contradiction to it. Thus the so-called Infancy Gospel of Thomas and the Protevangelium of James are filled with fanciful accounts of miracles supposedly wrought by Jesus in his childhood. But the whole effect of the picture they draw of him is to cause Jesus to appear as a capricious and petulant child endowed with impressive powers. (Compare the genuine account at Lu 2:51, 52.) The Apocryphal “Acts,” such as the “Acts of Paul” and the “Acts of Peter,” lay heavy stress on complete abstinence from sexual relations and even depict the apostles as urging women to separate from their husbands, thus contradicting Paul’s authentic counsel at 1 Corinthians 7.
Commenting on such postapostolic Apocryphal writings, The Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible (Vol. 1, p. 166) states: “Many of them are trivial, some are highly theatrical, some are disgusting, even loathsome.” (Edited by G. A. Buttrick, 1962) Funk and Wagnalls New Standard Bible Dictionary (1936, p. 56) comments: “They have been the fruitful source of sacred legends and ecclesiastical traditions. It is to these books that we must look for the origin of some of the dogmas of the Roman Catholic Church.”
Just as the earlier Apocryphal writings were excluded from among the accepted pre-Christian Hebrew Scriptures, so also these later Apocryphal writings were not accepted as inspired nor included as canonical in the earliest collections or catalogs of the Christian Greek Scriptures.—See CANON.
APOLLONIA
(Ap·ol·lo'ni·a) [Of (Belonging to) Apollo; Place of Apollo].
A city of Macedonia, named after the Greek sun-god Apollo, as were a number of other cities in the Mediterranean area. It was situated in the district of Mygdonia about 35 km (22 mi) from Amphipolis and 45 km (28 mi) from Thessalonica, or about one day’s travel from each. It lay on the great Roman highway Via Egnatia, S of Lake Bolbe, but it does not receive prominence in history. Paul and Silas passed through it on Paul’s second missionary tour, most likely in the spring or early summer of the year 50 C.E.—Ac 17:1.
APOLLOS
(A·pol'los) [Destroyer; abbreviation of Apollonius].
A Jew of Alexandria, Egypt, possessed of notable eloquence in speaking and a sound knowledge of the Hebrew Scriptures. He seems to have been witnessed to by disciples of John the Baptizer or else by Christian witnesses prior to Pentecost, since he was “acquainted with only the baptism of John.” (Ac 18:24, 25) Yet he was fired with conviction, and on arriving in Ephesus about 52 C.E., he began witnessing in the local synagogue. This brought him in contact with Aquila and Priscilla, who filled in some of the gaps in his understanding of Christian teaching. From Ephesus he went over to Achaia, supplied with a letter of introduction, and there he seems to have centered his activity in Corinth, where Paul had preceded him. His intensity and his powerful Scriptural confutations of the arguments of the unbelieving Jews proved of great aid to the brothers there. He thus ‘watered what Paul had planted.’—Ac 18:26-28; 19:1; 1Co 3:6.
Unfortunately, by the time Paul wrote his first letter to the Corinthians (c. 55 C.E.), factions had developed in the Corinth congregation, with some viewing the eloquent Apollos as their leader, while others favored Paul or Peter or held only to Christ. (1Co 1:10-12) Paul’s letter corrected their wrong thinking, showing the vital need for unity and the relative unimportance of individuals as only ministers serving under God and Christ. (1Co 3:4-9, 21-23; 4:6, 7) It appears that Apollos must then have been in or near Ephesus, where Paul evidently wrote First Corinthians, for Paul tells of his urging Apollos to visit the Corinth congregation. (1Co 16:12) Apollos’ reluctance to go may have been due to the improper attitudes existing in Corinth or simply due to his having a field of activity that he felt required his continued attention a while longer. At any rate, Paul’s brief statement shows that these two active missionaries had not allowed matters to produce a breach in their own unity. The final mention of Apollos is at Titus 3:13, where Paul asks Titus, then in Crete, to supply Apollos’ needs for a certain trip.
APOLLYON
(A·pol'lyon) [Destroyer].
The Greek name used by the apostle John to translate the Hebrew “Abaddon” at Revelation 9:11. Apollyon means “Destroyer,” and is given as the name of “the angel of the abyss.” Though most reference works apply this name to some evil personage or force, the whole setting of the apocalyptic vision is to the contrary, as it consistently portrays angels being used by God to bring woes upon His enemies.
The use of the related verb a·pol'ly·mi illustrates this, as at James 4:12, which says of God: “One there is that is lawgiver and judge, he who is able to save and to destroy.” (Compare Mt 10:28.) The unclean spirit cast out of a man by Jesus in a synagogue at Capernaum acknowledged Jesus as God’s agent and said: “What have we to do with you, Jesus you Nazarene? Did you come to destroy us?” (Mr 1:24; Lu 4:34) Jesus warned unrepentant opposers among his listeners of the danger of being destroyed. (Lu 13:3-5; 20:16) These and other texts point to the glorified Christ Jesus as the one referred to by this title.—Compare Re 19:11-16; Lu 8:31; see ABADDON.
APOSTASY
This term in Greek (a·po·sta·si'a) comes from the verb a·phi'ste·mi, literally meaning “stand away from.” The noun has the sense of “desertion, abandonment or rebellion.” (Ac 21:21, ftn) In classical Greek the noun was used to refer to political defection, and the verb is evidently employed in this sense at Acts 5:37, concerning Judas the Galilean who “drew off” (a·pe'ste·se, form of a·phi'ste·mi) followers. The Greek Septuagint uses the term at Genesis 14:4 with reference to such a rebellion. However, in the Christian Greek Scriptures it is used primarily with regard to religious defection; a withdrawal or abandonment of the true cause, worship, and service of God, and hence an abandonment of what one has previously professed and a total desertion of principles or faith. The religious leaders of Jerusalem charged Paul with such an apostasy against the Mosaic Law.
It may properly be said that God’s Adversary was the first apostate, as is indicated by the name Satan. He caused the first human pair to apostatize. (Ge 3:1-15; Joh 8:44) Following the Flood, there was a rebellion against the words of the God of Noah. (Ge 11:1-9) Job later found it necessary to defend himself against the charge of apostasy on the part of his three supposed comforters. (Job 8:13; 15:34; 20:5) In his defense Job showed that God grants no audience to the apostate (Job 13:16), and he also showed the hopeless state of one cut off in apostasy. (Job 27:8; compare also Elihu’s statement at 34:30; 36:13.) In these cases the Hebrew noun cha·neph' is used, meaning “[one] alienated from God,” that is, an apostate. The related verb cha·neph' means “be inclined away from the right relation to God,” or “pollute, lead to apostasy.”—Lexicon in Veteris Testamenti Libros, by L. Koehler and W. Baumgartner, Leiden, 1958, p. 317.
Apostasy in Israel. The first two commandments of the Law condemned all apostasy. (Ex 20:3-6) And before Israel’s entry into the Promised Land, they were warned against the grave danger of apostasy resulting from marriages with the people of the land. (De 7:3, 4) Even though a person who was inciting others to apostasy was a close relative or a marriage mate, he was to be put to death for having “spoken of revolt against Jehovah your God.” (De 13:1-15) The tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh were quick to exonerate themselves of a charge of apostasy that arose because of their construction of an altar.—Jos 22:21-29.
Many of the kings of Israel and of Judah followed an apostate course—for example, Saul (1Sa 15:11; 28:6, 7), Jeroboam (1Ki 12:28-32), Ahab (1Ki 16:30-33), Ahaziah (1Ki 22:51-53), Jehoram (2Ch 21:6-15), Ahaz (2Ch 28:1-4), and Amon (2Ch 33:22, 23). In due time a nation of apostates developed because the people listened to apostate priests and prophets (Jer 23:11, 15) and other unprincipled men who, by smooth words and false sayings, led them into loose conduct, immorality, and desertion of Jehovah, “the source of living water.” (Isa 10:6; 32:6, 7; Jer 3:1; 17:13) According to Isaiah 24:5, the very land became “polluted [cha·nephah'] under its inhabitants, for they have bypassed the laws, changed the regulation, broken the indefinitely lasting covenant.” No mercy was to be granted them in the predicted destruction.—Isa 9:17; 33:11-14; Zep 1:4-6.
What characteristics identify apostates as distinct from true Christians?
An apostasy among professed Christians was foretold by the apostle Paul at 2 Thessalonians 2:3. He specifically mentioned certain apostates, such as Hymenaeus, Alexander, and Philetus. (1Ti 1:19, 20; 2Ti 2:16-19) Among the varied causes of apostasy set forth in apostolic warnings were: lack of faith (Heb 3:12), lack of endurance in the face of persecution (Heb 10:32-39), abandonment of right moral standards (2Pe 2:15-22), the heeding of the “counterfeit words” of false teachers and “misleading inspired utterances” (2Pe 2:1-3; 1Ti 4:1-3; 2Ti 2:16-19; compare Pr 11:9), and trying “to be declared righteous by means of law” (Ga 5:2-4). While still making profession of faith in God’s Word, apostates may forsake his service by treating lightly the preaching and teaching work that he assigned to followers of Jesus Christ. (Lu 6:46; Mt 24:14; 28:19, 20) They may also claim to serve God but reject his representatives, his visible organization. (Jude 8, 11; Nu 16:19-21) Apostates often seek to make others their followers. (Ac 20:30; 2Pe 2:1, 3) Such ones willfully abandoning the Christian congregation thereby become part of the “antichrist.” (1Jo 2:18, 19) As with the apostate Israelites, destruction is likewise foretold for apostates from the Christian congregation.—2Pe 2:1; Heb 6:4-8; see ASSOCIATION.
During the period of persecution that the early Christian congregation experienced at the hands of the Roman Empire, professed Christians were at times induced to deny their Christian discipleship, and those who did so were required to signify their apostasy by making an incense offering before some pagan god or by openly blaspheming the name of Christ.
It is evident that there is a distinction between a ‘falling’ due to weakness and the ‘falling away’ that constitutes apostasy. The latter implies a definite and willful withdrawal from the path of righteousness. (1Jo 3:4-8; 5:16, 17) Whatever its apparent basis, whether intellectual, moral, or spiritual, it constitutes a rebellion against God and a rejection of his Word of truth.—2Th 2:3, 4; see MAN OF LAWLESSNESS.
APOSTLE
The Greek word a·po'sto·los is derived from the common verb a·po·stel'lo, meaning simply “send forth (or off).” (Mt 10:5; Mr 11:3) Its basic sense is clearly illustrated in Jesus’ statement: “A slave is not greater than his master, nor is one that is sent forth [a·po'sto·los] greater than the one that sent him.” (Joh 13:16) In this sense the word also applies to Christ Jesus as “the apostle and high priest whom we confess.” (Heb 3:1; compare Mt 10:40; 15:24; Lu 4:18, 43; 9:48; 10:16; Joh 3:17; 5:36, 38; 6:29, 57; 7:29; 8:42; 10:36; 11:42; 17:3, 8, 18, 21-25; 20:21.) Jesus was sent forth by God as his appointed and commissioned representative.
The term is principally applied, however, to those disciples whom Jesus personally selected as a body of 12 appointed representatives. The names of the original 12 selected are given at Matthew 10:2-4; Mark 3:16-19, and Luke 6:13-16. One of the original 12, Judas Iscariot, proved to be a traitor, thereby fulfilling earlier prophecies. (Ps 41:9; 109:8) The remaining 11 faithful apostles are again listed at Acts 1:13.
Some of the apostles had been disciples of John the Baptizer before becoming Jesus’ disciples. (Joh 1:35-42) Eleven of them were evidently Galileans (Ac 2:7), Judas Iscariot being considered the sole Judean. They were from the working class; four were definitely fishermen by trade; one had been a tax collector. (Mt 4:18-21; 9:9-13) At least two of them appear to have been cousins of Jesus (James and John, the sons of Zebedee). They were men who were viewed by the religious leaders as “unlettered and ordinary,” indicating that their education was elementary and not from the schools of higher learning. A number of them, including Peter (Cephas), were married men.—Ac 4:13; 1Co 9:5.
Of the 12, Peter, James, and John seem to have enjoyed the closest relationship with Jesus. They alone witnessed the resurrection of Jairus’ daughter (Mr 5:35-43) and the transfiguration of Jesus (Mt 17:1, 2), and they accompanied him farther into the garden of Gethsemane than the other apostles on the night of his arrest. (Mr 14:32, 33) A special affinity appears to have existed between Jesus and John, and John is accepted as being the one referred to as “the disciple whom Jesus used to love.”—Joh 21:20-24; 13:23.
Selection and Early Ministry. The 12 were selected out of a larger group of disciples and were designated “apostles” by Jesus, “that they might continue with him and that he might send them out [a·po·stel'lei] to preach and to have authority to expel the demons.” (Mr 3:13-15) Thereafter they did “continue with him” in very close association during the remainder of his earthly ministry, receiving extensive personal instruction and ministerial training. (Mt 10:1-42; Lu 8:1) Since they continued to be Jesus’ pupils, they were still called “disciples,” particularly in accounts of events prior to Pentecost. (Mt 11:1; 14:26; 20:17; Joh 20:2) Thereafter they are consistently called “apostles.” At the time of their appointment, Jesus gave them miraculous powers to heal, as well as to expel demons, and they used these powers to some extent during Jesus’ ministry. (Mr 3:14, 15; 6:13; Mt 10:1-8; Lu 9:6; compare Mt 17:16.) This activity, however, is shown to be always subordinate to their principal work of preaching. Though forming an inner circle of followers, their instruction and training included no mysterious rituals or ceremonies.
Human Weaknesses. Though greatly favored as apostles of God’s Son, they manifested normal human failings and weaknesses. Peter was inclined to be rash and impetuous (Mt 16:22, 23; Joh 21:7, 8); Thomas was slow to be convinced (Joh 20:24, 25); James and John manifested youthful impatience (Lu 9:49, 54). They quarreled over the issue of their future greatness in the earthly kingdom that they expected Jesus to establish. (Mt 20:20-28; Mr 10:35-45; compare Ac 1:6; Lu 24:21.) They acknowledged their need for greater faith. (Lu 17:5; compare Mt 17:20.) Despite their years of intimate association with Jesus and though knowing him to be the Messiah, they all abandoned him at the time of his arrest (Mt 26:56); the matter of his burial was handled by others. The apostles were slow at first to accept the testimony of the women who first saw Jesus after his resurrection. (Lu 24:10, 11) Because of fear they met behind locked doors. (Joh 20:19, 26) The resurrected Jesus gave them further enlightenment, and following his ascension to heaven on the 40th day from his resurrection, they manifested great joy and “were continually in the temple blessing God.”—Lu 24:44-53.
Activity in Christian Congregation. The outpouring of God’s spirit upon them at Pentecost greatly strengthened the apostles. The first five chapters of the Acts of Apostles testify to the great fearlessness of the apostles and their boldness in declaring the good news and the resurrection of Jesus in spite of jailing, beatings, and threats of death from their rulers. During those early days after Pentecost, the dynamic leadership of the apostles, under the power of the holy spirit, resulted in amazing expansion in the Christian congregation. (Ac 2:41; 4:4) Their ministry was at first concentrated in Jerusalem, then extended to Samaria, and in time, throughout the known world.—Ac 5:42; 6:7; 8:5-17, 25; 1:8.
Their primary function as apostles was to be witnesses as to Jesus’ fulfillment of Jehovah God’s purposes and prophecies, particularly of his resurrection and exaltation, and to do a discipling work among all nations; and this commission was emphasized to them by Jesus just before his ascension to heaven. (Mt 28:19, 20; Ac 1:8, 22; 2:32-36; 3:15-26) Their testimony concerning the resurrection was that of eyewitnesses.—Ac 13:30-34.
Miraculous powers. Additionally, to fortify their testimony, the apostles continued to exercise the miraculous powers previously granted them by Jesus, and also other gifts of the spirit received from Pentecost forward. (Ac 5:12; 9:36-40; see GIFTS FROM GOD [Gifts of the Spirit].) While others, too, received such miraculous gifts of the spirit, the account shows that such was the case only when one or more of the apostles were present, or by the laying on of the hands of the apostles. Paul, though not one of the 12, also served in this way as an apostle personally appointed by Jesus Christ. (Ac 2:1, 4, 14; 8:14-18; 10:44; 19:6) Thus the power to transmit such gifts was unique with these apostles. Such miraculous gifts would therefore pass away with the passing away of these apostles and of those who had received these gifts through the apostles (1Co 13:2, 8-11), and thus we read that these powers were “missing in the 2nd-century church, the writers of those days speaking of them as a thing in the past—in the apostolic age, in fact.”—The Illustrated Bible Dictionary, edited by J. D. Douglas, 1980, Vol. 1, p. 79.
Administrative position. In the formation, organization, and subsequent direction of the Christian congregation, the apostles occupied a primary position. (1Co 12:28; Eph 4:11) Although they were joined by others of the “older men” in such supervision, they formed a principal part of the governing body of the expanding Christian congregation, and this body was recognized by the early Christians everywhere as the channel of communication used by God to render decisions and direct the affairs of the congregation throughout the earth. (Ac 2:42; 8:14-17; 11:22; 15:1, 2, 6-31; 16:4, 5) This was possible for these men only because of the fulfillment of the promises about guidance by God’s holy spirit. (Joh 15:26, 27) Such help enabled them to recall Jesus’ instructions and teachings, to clarify points of doctrine, and to be progressively guided “into all the truth” revealed through them at that apostolic period. (Joh 14:26; 16:13-15; compare Joh 2:22; 12:16.) They made appointments to positions of service within the congregation and also designated areas in which certain ones would engage in missionary activity.—Ac 6:2, 3; Ga 2:8, 9.
The apostles, therefore, served as a foundation, resting on Christ Jesus himself as the cornerstone, for the building up of the “holy temple for Jehovah.” (Eph 2:20-22; 1Pe 2:4-6) There is no evidence of the primacy of any one apostle in the established Christian congregation. (See PETER.) Peter and John appear to have been especially prominent at Pentecost and immediately thereafter, with Peter acting as the principal spokesman. (Ac 2:14, 37, 38; 3:1, 4, 11; 4:1, 13, 19; 5:3, 8, 15, 29) However, in the decisions made at that time neither of these appears to have had a superiority over the others of the governing body, and when news arrived of the baptisms taking place in Samaria, the apostles in Jerusalem “dispatched [a·pe'stei·lan] Peter and John to them,” so that these two served, in effect, as apostles of the apostles. (Ac 6:2-6; 8:14, 15) Following the death of the apostle James, the disciple of the same name, James the half brother of Jesus, appears to have presided in the governing body. Paul speaks of this James and also Peter (Cephas) and John as “the ones who seemed to be pillars.” (Ac 12:1, 2, 16, 17; Ga 1:18, 19; 2:9, 11-14) It was James who announced the final decision on the important issue of circumcision as involving the Gentile believers, at which meeting Peter and Paul both presented testimony.—Ac 15:1, 2, 6-21.
Who replaced Judas Iscariot as a twelfth apostle?