What Does the Bible
Really Teach?
Large-Print Edition

s

bhlp-E
161025

Ask for a free Bible study.

What Does the Bible
Really Teach?
Large-Print Edition

THIS BOOK IS THE PROPERTY OF

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from
the modern-language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
What Does the Bible Really Teach?—Large Print
October 2016 Printing
English (bhlp-E)
5 2005, 2015
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
PUBLISHERS
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of
New York, Inc., Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

Is This What God Purposed?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

1. What Is the Truth About God?
2. The Bible—A Book From God

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

21
31

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

44

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

57

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

70

5. The Ransom—God’s Greatest Gift
6. Where Are the Dead?

· · · · · · · · ·

82

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

95

7. Real Hope for Your Loved Ones Who Have Died
8. What Is God’s Kingdom?

9. Are We Living in “the Last Days”?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

11. Why Does God Allow Su?ering?

109

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

121

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

133

10. Spirit Creatures—How They A?ect Us

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

145

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

158

12. Living in a Way That Pleases God
13. A Godly View of Life

8

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

3. What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?
4. Who Is Jesus Christ?

4

14. How to Make Your Family Life Happy

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

170

15. Worship That God Approves

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

197

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

209

16. Take Your Stand for True Worship
17. Draw Close to God in Prayer

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

222

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

235

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

247

18. Baptism and Your Relationship With God
19. Remain in God’s Love
Appendix

184

Is This What God Purposed?
READ any newspaper. Look at television, or listen to the radio. There are so many stories of
crime, war, and terrorism! Think about your own
troubles. Perhaps illness or the death of a loved
one is causing you great distress. You may feel like
the good man Job, who said that he was “?lled
with dishonor and a?iction.”—Job 10:15.
Ask yourself:
? Is this what God purposed for me and for the rest
of mankind?
? Where can I ?nd help to cope with my problems?
? Is there any hope that we will ever see peace on the
earth?
The Bible provides satisfying answers to these
questions.
4

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

THE BIBLE TEACHES THAT
GOD WILL BRING ABOUT
THESE CHANGES ON THE EARTH.
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes,
and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor
outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4
“The lame will leap like the deer.”
—Isaiah 35:6
“The eyes of the blind will be opened.”
—Isaiah 35:5
“All those in the memorial tombs will . . . come out.”
—John 5:28, 29
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ ”
—Isaiah 33:24
“There will be an abundance of grain on the earth.”
—Psalm 72:16

Is This What God Purposed?

5

BENEFIT FROM WHAT
THE BIBLE TEACHES
Do not quickly dismiss what is presented on the
preceding pages as mere wishful thinking. God has
promised to bring these things about, and the Bible
explains how he will do so.
But the Bible does more than that. It provides the
key to your enjoying a truly satisfying life even now.
Think for a moment about your own anxieties and
troubles. They may include money matters, family
problems, loss of health, or the death of a loved one.
The Bible can help you to deal with problems today,
and it can provide relief by answering such questions
as these:
?
?
?
?
?
?

Why do we su?er?
How can we cope with life’s anxieties?
How can we make our family life happier?
What happens to us when we die?
Will we ever see our dead loved ones again?
How can we be sure that God will ful?ll his promises for the
future?

The fact that you are reading this book shows that
you would like to ?nd out what the Bible teaches.
This book will help you. Notice that the paragraphs
have corresponding questions at the bottom of the
6

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

page. Millions have enjoyed using the question-andanswer method when discussing the Bible with
Jehovah’s Witnesses. We hope you will too. May you
have God’s blessing as you now enjoy the thrilling
and satisfying experience of learning what the Bible
really teaches!

GET TO KNOW YOUR BIBLE
THERE are 66 books and letters that make up the Bible. These are divided into chapters and verses for
easy reference. When scriptures are cited in this publication, the ?rst number after the name indicates the
chapter of the Bible book or letter, and the next refers
to the verse. For example, the citation “2 Timothy 3:
16” means the second letter to Timothy, chapter 3,
verse 16.
You will quickly become familiar with the Bible by
looking up the scriptures cited in this publication.
Also, why not start a program of daily Bible reading?
By reading three to ?ve chapters a day, you can read
the entire Bible in a year.

Is This What God Purposed?

7

CHAPTER ONE

What Is the Truth About God?
Does God really care about you?
What is God like? Does he have a name?
Is it possible to get close to God?
HAVE you ever noticed the way children ask questions? Many start asking as soon as they learn to
speak. With wide, eager eyes, they look up at you
and ask such things as: Why is the sky blue? What
are the stars made of? Who taught the birds to sing?
You may try hard to answer, but it is not always
easy. Even your best answer may lead to yet another question: Why?
2 Children are not the only ones who ask questions. As we grow up, we keep asking. We do this
in order to ?nd our way, to learn of dangers that we
need to avoid, or to satisfy our curiosity. But many
people seem to stop asking questions, especially the
most important ones. At least, they stop searching
for the answers.
1, 2. Why is it often good to ask questions?
8

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

3

Think about the question on the cover of this

book, the questions raised in the preface, or those
at the beginning of this chapter. These are some of
the most important questions you can ask. Yet,
many people have given up trying to ?nd the answers. Why? Does the Bible have the answers? Some
feel that its answers are too hard to understand.
Others worry that asking questions could lead to
shame or embarrassment. And some decide that
such questions are best left to religious leaders and
teachers. What about you?
4

Very likely you are interested in getting answers

to life’s big questions. No doubt you sometimes
wonder: ‘What is the purpose of life? Is this life all
there is? What is God really like?’ It is good to ask
such questions, and it is important that you do not
give up until you ?nd satisfying, reliable answers.
The famous teacher Jesus Christ said: “Keep on
asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking,
3. Why do many stop trying to ?nd answers to the questions that matter most?
4, 5. What are some of the most important questions we can ask in
life, and why should we seek the answers?
What Is the Truth About God?

9

and you will ?nd; keep on knocking, and it will be
opened to you.”—Matthew 7:7.
5

If you “keep on seeking” for answers to the im-

portant questions, you will ?nd that the search can
be very rewarding. (Proverbs 2:1-5) Despite what
other people may have told you, there are answers,
and you can ?nd them—in the Bible. The answers
are not too hard to understand. Better yet, they
bring hope and joy. And they can help you to live
a satisfying life right now. To begin, let us consider
a question that has troubled many people.
IS G OD UNCARING AND HARDHEARTED?
6 Many people think that the answer to that ques-

tion is yes. ‘If God cared,’ they reason, ‘would not
the world be a very di?erent place?’ We look around
and see a world full of war, hatred, and misery. And
as individuals, we get sick, we su?er, we lose loved
ones in death. Thus, many say, ‘If God cared about
us and our problems, would he not prevent such
things from happening?’
6. Why do many people think that God is uncaring when it comes to
human su?ering?
10

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

7

Worse yet, religious teachers sometimes lead

people to think that God is hardhearted. How so?
When tragedy strikes, they say that it is God’s will.
In e?ect, such teachers blame God for the bad
things that happen. Is that the truth about God?
What does the Bible really teach? James 1:13 answers: “When under trial, let no one say: ‘I am being tried by God.’ For with evil things God cannot
be tried, nor does he himself try anyone.” So God
is never the source of the wickedness you see in the
world around you. (Read Job 34:10-12.) Granted, he
does allow bad things to happen. But there is a big
di?erence between allowing something to happen
and causing it.
8

For example, think about a wise and loving fa-

ther with a grown son who is still living at home
with his parents. When the son becomes rebellious
7. (a) How have religious teachers led many to think that God is hardhearted? (b) What does the Bible really teach about the trials we may
su?er?
8, 9. (a) How might you illustrate the di?erence between allowing
wickedness to exist and causing it? (b) Why would it be unfair for us
to ?nd fault with God’s decision to allow mankind to pursue a wayward
course?
What Is the Truth About God?

11

and decides to leave home, his father does not stop
him. The son pursues a bad way of life and gets into
trouble. Is the father the cause of his son’s problems? No. (Luke 15:11-13) Similarly, God has not
stopped humans when they have chosen to pursue
a bad course, but he is not the cause of the problems that have resulted. Surely, then, it would be
unfair to blame God for all the troubles of mankind.
9

God has good reasons for allowing mankind to

follow a bad course. As our wise and powerful Creator, he does not have to explain his reasons to us.
Out of love, however, God does this. You will learn
more about these reasons in Chapter 11. But rest
assured that God is not responsible for the problems we face. On the contrary, he gives us the only
hope for a solution!—Isaiah 33:2.
10

Furthermore, God is holy. (Isaiah 6:3) This

means that he is pure and clean. There is no trace
of badness in him. So we can trust him completely.
10. Why can we trust that God will undo all the e?ects of wickedness?
12

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

That is more than we can say for humans, who
sometimes become corrupt. Even the most honest
human in authority often does not have the power
to undo the damage that bad people do. But God
is all-powerful. He can and will undo all the e?ects
that wickedness has had on mankind. When God
acts, he will do so in a way that will end evil forever!—Read Psalm 37:9-11.

11

HOW D OES G OD FEEL AB OUT
INJUSTICES WE FACE?
In the meantime, how does God feel about

what is going on in the world and in your life? Well,
the Bible teaches that God “loves justice.” (Psalm
37:28) So he cares deeply about what is right and
what is wrong. He hates all kinds of injustice. The
Bible says that God’s “heart was saddened” when
badness ?lled the world in times past. (Genesis 6:
5, 6) God has not changed. (Malachi 3:6) He still
hates to see the su?ering that is taking place worldwide. And God hates to see people su?er. “He cares
for you,” the Bible says.—Read 1 Peter 5:7.
11. (a) How does God feel about injustice? (b) How does God feel
about your su?ering?
What Is the Truth About God?

13

12

How can we be sure that God hates to see suf-

fering? Here is further proof. The Bible teaches that
man was made in the image of God. (Genesis 1:26)
We thus have good qualities because God has good
qualities. For example, does it bother you to see innocent people su?er? If you care about such injustices, be assured that God feels even more strongly
about them.
13

One of the best things about humans is our

ability to love. That also re?ects God. The Bible
teaches that “God is love.” (1 John 4:8) We love because God loves. Would love move you to end the
su?ering and the injustice you see in the world? If
you had the power to do that, would you do it? Of
course you would! You can be just as sure that God
will end su?ering and injustice. The promises mentioned in the preface of this book are not mere
dreams or idle hopes. God’s promises are sure to
come true! In order to put faith in such promises,
12, 13. (a) Why do we have good qualities such as love, and how does
love a?ect our view of the world? (b) Why can you be sure that God
will really do something about world problems?
14

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

though, you need to know more about the God who
has made them.

14

G OD WANTS YOU TO KNOW
WHO HE IS
If you want someone to get to know you, what

might you do? Would you not tell the person your
name? Does God have a name? Many religions answer that his name is “God” or “Lord,” but those
are not personal names. They are titles, just as
“king” and “president” are titles. The Bible teaches
that God has many titles. “God” and “Lord” are
among them. However, the Bible also teaches that
God has a personal name: Jehovah. Psalm 83:18
says: “You, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are
the Most High over all the earth.” If your Bible
translation does not contain that name, you may
want to consult the Appendix on pages 248-251 of
this book to learn why that is so. The truth is that
God’s name appears thousands of times in ancient
Bible manuscripts. So Jehovah wants you to know
his name and to use it. In a sense, he is using the
Bible to introduce himself to you.
14. What is God’s name, and why should we use it?
What Is the Truth About God?

15

God gave himself a name that is full of meaning. His name, Jehovah, means that God can ful?ll
any promise he makes and can carry out any purpose he has in mind.1 God’s name is unique, one of
a kind. It belongs only to him. In a number of ways,
Jehovah is unique. How is that so?
15

We saw that Psalm 83:18 said of Jehovah: “You
alone are the Most High.” Similarly, Jehovah alone
is referred to as “the Almighty.” Revelation 15:3
says: “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah
God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your
ways, King of eternity.” The title “the Almighty”
teaches us that Jehovah is the most powerful being
there is. His power is unmatched; it is supreme.
And the title “King of eternity” reminds us that Jehovah is unique in another sense. He alone has always existed. Psalm 90:2 says: “From everlasting to
everlasting, you are God.” That thought inspires
awe, does it not?
16

1 There is more information on the meaning and the pronunciation of God’s name in the Appendix on pages 248-251.

15. What does the name Jehovah mean?
16, 17. What may we learn about Jehovah from the following titles:
(a) “the Almighty”? (b) “King of eternity”? (c) “Creator”?
16

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jehovah is also unique in that he alone is the
Creator. Revelation 4:11 reads: “You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor
and the power, because you created all things, and
because of your will they came into existence and
were created.” Everything that you can think of
—from the invisible spirit creatures in heaven to
the stars that ?ll the night sky to the fruit that
grows on the trees to the ?sh that swim in the
oceans and rivers—all of it exists because Jehovah
is the Creator!
17

18

CAN YOU BE CLO SE TO JEHOVAH?
Reading about Jehovah’s awe-inspiring qualities

makes some people feel a little uneasy. They fear
that God is too high for them, that they could never get close to him or even matter to such a lofty
God. But is this idea correct? The Bible teaches just
the opposite. It says of Jehovah: “In fact, he is not
far o? from each one of us.” (Acts 17:27) The Bible
even urges us: “Draw close to God, and he will draw
close to you.”—James 4:8.
18. Why do some people feel that they could never get close to God,
but what does the Bible teach?
What Is the Truth About God?

17

How can you draw close to God? To begin with,
continue doing what you are doing now—learning
about God. Jesus said: “This means everlasting life,
their coming to know you, the only true God, and
the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3)
Yes, the Bible teaches that learning about Jehovah
and Jesus leads to “everlasting life”! As already noted, “God is love.” (1 John 4:16) Jehovah also has
many other beautiful and appealing qualities. For
example, the Bible says that Jehovah is “a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth.” (Exodus 34:6) He is
“good and ready to forgive.” (Psalm 86:5) God is
patient. (2 Peter 3:9) He is loyal. (Revelation 15:4)
As you read more in the Bible, you will see how Jehovah has shown that he has these and many other
appealing qualities.
19

True, you cannot see God because he is an invisible Spirit. (John 1:18; 4:24; 1 Timothy 1:17) By
20

19. (a) How can we begin to draw close to God, and with what bene?t? (b) What qualities of God are most appealing to you?
20-22. (a) Does our inability to see God prevent us from getting close
to him? Explain. (b) What may some well-meaning people urge you to
do, but what should you do?
18

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

learning about him through the pages of the Bible,
however, you can come to know him as a Person.
As the psalmist said, you can “gaze upon the pleasantness of Jehovah.” (Psalm 27:4; Romans 1:20) The
more you learn about Jehovah, the more real he will
become to you and the more reason you will have
to love him and feel close to him.
You will come to understand why the Bible
teaches us to think of Jehovah as our Father. (Matthew 6:9) Not only does our life come from him but
he wants the best life possible for us—just as any
loving father would want for his children. (Psalm
36:9) The Bible also teaches that humans can become Jehovah’s friends. (James 2:23) Imagine—you
can become a friend of the Creator of the universe!
21

As you learn more from the Bible, you may ?nd
that some well-meaning people will urge you to
stop such studies. They may worry that you will
change your beliefs. But do not let anyone stop you
from forming the best friendship you can ever have.
22

23

Of course, there will be things that you do not

23, 24. (a) Why should you continue to ask questions about what you
are learning? (b) What is the subject of the next chapter?
What Is the Truth About God?

19

understand at ?rst. It can be a little humbling to
ask for help, but do not hold back because of embarrassment. Jesus said that it is good to be humble, like a little child. (Matthew 18:2-4) And children, as we know, ask a lot of questions. God wants
you to ?nd the answers. The Bible praises some who
were eager to learn about God. They checked carefully in the Scriptures to make sure that what they
were learning was the truth.—Read Acts 17:11.
24

The best way to learn about Jehovah is to ex-

amine the Bible. It is di?erent from any other book.
In what way? The next chapter will consider that
subject.

WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES
? God cares about you personally.—1 Peter 5:7.
? God’s personal name is Jehovah.
—Psalm 83:18.
? Jehovah invites you to draw close to him.
—James 4:8.
? Jehovah is loving and merciful.
—Exodus 34:6; 1 John 4:8, 16.
20

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

CHAPTER TWO

The Bible—A Book From God
In what ways is the Bible di?erent
from any other book?
How can the Bible help you cope
with personal problems?
Why can you trust the prophecies
recorded in the Bible?
CAN you recall a time when you received a ?ne gift
from a dear friend? Likely, the experience was not
only exciting but also heartwarming. After all, a gift
tells you something about the giver—that he or she
values your friendship. No doubt you expressed gratitude for your friend’s thoughtful gift.
The Bible is a gift from God, one for which we can
be truly grateful. This unique book reveals things
that we could never ?nd out otherwise. For example,
it tells us about the creation of the starry heavens, the
earth, and the ?rst man and woman. The Bible contains reliable principles to help us cope with life’s
2

1, 2. In what ways is the Bible an exciting gift from God?
The Bible—A Book From God

21

problems and anxieties. It explains how God will ful?ll his purpose and bring about better conditions on
the earth. What an exciting gift the Bible is!
3

The Bible is also a heartwarming gift, for it reveals

something about the Giver, Jehovah God. The fact
that he has provided such a book is proof that he
wants us to get to know him well. Indeed, the Bible
can help you to draw close to Jehovah.
4

If you have a copy of the Bible, you are far from

alone. In whole or in part, the Bible has been published in about 2,600 languages and thus is available
to more than 90 percent of the world’s population.
On the average, more than a million Bibles are distributed each week! Billions of copies of either the
whole Bible or part of it have been produced. Surely, there is no other book like the Bible.
5

Furthermore, the Bible is “inspired of God.” (Read

2 Timothy 3:16.) In what way? The Bible itself answers: “Men spoke from God as they were moved by
3. What does the provision of the Bible tell us about Jehovah, and why
is this heartwarming?
4. What impresses you about the distribution of the Bible?
5. In what way is the Bible “inspired of God”?
22

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

holy spirit.” (2 Peter 1:21) To illustrate: A businessman might have a secretary write a letter. That letter contains the businessman’s thoughts and instructions. Hence, it is really his letter, not the secretary’s.
In a similar way, the Bible contains God’s message,
not that of the men who wrote it down. Thus, the entire Bible truthfully is “the word of God.”—1 Thessalonians 2:13.
6

HARMONIOUS AND ACCURATE
The Bible was written over a 1,600-year period. Its

writers lived at di?erent times and came from many
walks of life. Some were farmers, ?shermen, and
shepherds. Others were prophets, judges, and kings.
The Gospel writer Luke was a doctor. Despite the
varied backgrounds of its writers, the Bible is harmonious from beginning to end.1
7

The ?rst book of the Bible tells us how mankind’s

problems began. The last book shows that the whole
1 Although some people say that certain parts of the Bible contradict other parts of it, such claims are unfounded. See chapter 7
of the book The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? published by Jehovah’s
Witnesses.

6, 7. Why is the harmony of the material in the Bible particularly
noteworthy?
The Bible—A Book From God

23

earth will become a paradise, or garden. All the material in the Bible covers thousands of years of history and relates in some way to the unfolding of God’s
purpose. The harmony of the Bible is impressive, but
that is what we would expect of a book from God.
The Bible is scienti?cally accurate. It even contains information that was far ahead of its time. For
example, the book of Leviticus contained laws for ancient Israel on quarantine and hygiene when surrounding nations knew nothing about such matters.
At a time when there were wrong ideas about the
shape of the earth, the Bible referred to it as a circle,
or sphere. (Isaiah 40:22) The Bible accurately said
that the earth is suspended “upon nothing.” (Job
26:7) Of course, the Bible is not a science textbook.
But when it touches on scienti?c matters, it is accurate. Is this not what we would expect of a book from
God?
8

The Bible is also historically accurate and reliable.
Its accounts are speci?c. They include not only the
9

8. Give examples showing that the Bible is scienti?cally accurate.
9. (a) In what ways does the Bible show itself to be historically accurate and reliable? (b) What does the honesty of its writers tell you
about the Bible?
24

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

names but also the ancestry of individuals.1 In contrast to secular historians, who often do not mention
the defeats of their own people, Bible writers were
honest, even recording their own failings and those
of their nation. In the Bible book of Numbers, for instance, the writer Moses admits his own serious error for which he was severely reproved. (Numbers 20:
2-12) Such honesty is rare in other historical accounts
but is found in the Bible because it is a book from
God.
10

A B O OK OF PRACTICAL WISD OM
Because the Bible is inspired of God, it is “bene-

?cial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things
straight.” (2 Timothy 3:16) Yes, the Bible is a practical book. It re?ects a keen understanding of human
nature. No wonder, for its Author, Jehovah God, is
the Creator! He understands our thinking and emotions better than we do. Furthermore, Jehovah knows
what we need in order to be happy. He also knows
what pathways we should avoid.
1 For example, note the detailed ancestral line of Jesus set out at
Luke 3:23-38.

10. Why is it not surprising that the Bible is a practical book?
The Bible—A Book From God

25

Consider Jesus’ speech called the Sermon on the
Mount, recorded in Matthew chapters 5 to 7. In this
masterpiece of teaching, Jesus spoke on a number of
topics, including the way to ?nd true happiness, how
to settle disputes, how to pray, and how to have the
proper view of material things. Jesus’ words are just
as powerful and practical today as they were when he
spoke them.
11

Some Bible principles deal with family life, work
habits, and relationships with others. The Bible’s
principles apply to all people, and its counsel is always bene?cial. The wisdom found in the Bible is
summarized by God’s words through the prophet Isaiah: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you
to bene?t yourself.”—Isaiah 48:17.
12

A B O OK OF PROPHECY
13 The Bible contains numerous prophecies, many
of which have already been ful?lled. Consider an example. Through the prophet Isaiah, who lived in the
11, 12. (a) What topics did Jesus discuss in his Sermon on the
Mount? (b) What other practical matters are considered in the Bible,
and why is its counsel timeless?
13. What details did Jehovah inspire the prophet Isaiah to record regarding Babylon?
26

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

eighth century B.C.E., Jehovah foretold that the city
of Babylon would be destroyed. (Isaiah 13:19; 14:22,
23) Details were given to show just how the city
would be conquered. Invading armies would dry up
Babylon’s river and march into the city without a battle. That is not all. Isaiah’s prophecy even named the
king who would conquer Babylon—Cyrus.—Read Isaiah 44:27–45:2.
Some 200 years later—on the night of October 5/6, 539 B.C.E.—an army encamped near Babylon. Who was its commander? A Persian king named
Cyrus. The stage was thus set for the ful?llment of
an amazing prophecy. But would the army of Cyrus
invade Babylon without a battle, as foretold?
14

The Babylonians were holding a festival that
night and felt secure behind their massive city walls.
Meanwhile, Cyrus cleverly diverted the water of the
river that ?owed through the city. Soon the water
was shallow enough for his men to cross the riverbed
and approach the walls of the city. But how would Cyrus’ army get past Babylon’s walls? For some reason,
15

14, 15. How were some details of Isaiah’s prophecy about Babylon
ful?lled?
The Bible—A Book From God

27

on that night the doors to the city were carelessly left
open!
Regarding Babylon, it was foretold: “She will never be inhabited, nor will she be a place to reside in
throughout all generations. No Arab will pitch his
tent there, and no shepherds will rest their ?ocks
there.” (Isaiah 13:20) This prophecy did more than
predict a city’s fall. It showed that Babylon would be
desolated permanently. You can see evidence of the
ful?llment of these words. The uninhabited site of ancient Babylon—about 50 miles south of Baghdad,
Iraq—is proof that what Jehovah spoke through Isaiah has been ful?lled: “I will sweep her with the
broom of annihilation.”—Isaiah 14:22, 23.1
16

Considering how the Bible is a book of reliable
prophecy is faith strengthening, is it not? After all, if
Jehovah God has ful?lled his past promises, we have
every reason to be con?dent that he will also ful?ll
his promise of a paradise earth. (Read Numbers 23:19.)
17

1 For more information on Bible prophecy, see pages 27-29 of the
brochure A Book for All People, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

16. (a) What did Isaiah foretell about the ?nal outcome of Babylon?
(b) How was Isaiah’s prophecy about Babylon’s desolation ful?lled?
17. How is the ful?llment of Bible prophecy faith strengthening?
28

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Indeed, we have “hope of the everlasting life that
God, who cannot lie, promised long ago.”—Titus 1:2.1
18

“THE WORD OF G OD IS ALIVE”
From what we have considered in this chapter, it

is clear that the Bible is truly a unique book. Yet,
its value extends far beyond its internal harmony,
scienti?c and historical accuracy, practical wisdom,
and reliable prophecy. The Christian apostle Paul
wrote: “The word of God is alive and exerts power
and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces
even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints
from the marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and
intentions of the heart.”—Hebrews 4:12.
19

Reading God’s “word,” or message, in the Bi-

ble can change our life. It can help us to examine
1 The destruction of Babylon is just one example of ful?lled Bible
prophecy. Other examples include the destruction of Tyre and Nineveh. (Ezekiel 26:1-5; Zephaniah 2:13-15) Also, Daniel’s prophecy
for] ceremony in preChristian times. The Celts had festivals for two major gods
—a sun god and a god of the dead . . . , whose festival was
held on November 1, the beginning of the Celtic New Year.
286

What Does the Bible Really Teach?

The festival of the dead was gradually incorporated into
Christian ritual.”
Other Holidays. It is not possible to discuss all the obser-

vances held throughout the world. However, holidays that
exalt humans or human organizations are not acceptable
to Jehovah. (Jeremiah 17:5-7; Acts 10:25, 26) Keep in mind,
too, that the origin of religious celebrations has a bearing
on whether they please God or not. (Isaiah 52:11; Revelation 18:4) The Bible principles mentioned in Chapter 16 of
this book will help you to determine how God views participation in holidays of a secular nature.

Appendix

287

For more information, visit www.jw.org
or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.

