Bearing Witness—Large Print

“Bearing Thorough Witness”
About God’s Kingdom
Large-Print Edition

btlp-E

“Bearing Thorough Witness”
About God’s Kingdom
Large-Print Edition

This book is the property of

5 2010
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
All Rights Reserved
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
November 2012 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations
are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures
—With References.
“Bearing Thorough Witness” About God’s Kingdom—Large Print
English (btlp-E)

Made in the United States of America

Dear Kingdom Proclaimer:

Imagine that you are one of the apostles standing on the Mount of Olives. Jesus appears before
you. Just as he is about to ascend to heaven, he
says: “You will receive power when the holy spirit
arrives upon you, and you will be witnesses of me
both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria
and to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts
1:8) How would you react?
Perhaps you would feel overwhelmed by the
enormity of the task. You may wonder, ‘How can
we—a small band of disciples—possibly bear witness to “the most distant part of the earth”?’ You
may recall the warning Jesus gave on the night
before his death: “A slave is not greater than his
master. If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also; if they have observed my word,
they will observe yours also. But they will do all
these things against you on account of my name,
because they do not know him that sent me.”
(John 15:20, 21) Re?ecting on those words, you
might ask yourself, ‘How can I bear thorough
witness in the face of such opposition and persecution?’
Today, we face similar questions. Our commission as Jehovah’s Witnesses likewise requires that
we bear thorough witness to “the most distant part
of the earth,” to “people of all the nations.” (Matt.

28:19, 20) How can this work be accomplished, especially in view of the foretold opposition?
Acts of Apostles gives us a thrilling account of
how the apostles and their fellow Christians in the
?rst century C.E. were able, with Jehovah’s help,
to ful?ll their assignment. The publication that
you are now reading is designed to help you examine that record and feel the excitement of the
fast-moving events recorded therein. You will be
amazed at the number of parallels that exist between God’s servants of the ?rst century and his
people today. You will see that these parallels involve not only the work we do but also the way we
are organized to do that work. Re?ecting on these
similarities will no doubt fortify your belief that
Jehovah God is continuing to direct the earthly
part of his organization.
It is our hope and prayer that examining the
book of Acts will strengthen your con?dence that
Jehovah will help you and that the power of his
holy spirit will sustain you. May you thereby be
encouraged to continue “bearing thorough witness” about God’s Kingdom and helping others
get on the path to salvation.—Acts 28:23; 1 Tim.
4:16.
Your brothers,

Governing Body
of Jehovah’s Witnesses

CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

INTRODUCTION

1. “Go . . . and Make Disciples”  7
SECTION 1

“You Have Filled Jerusalem With Your
Teaching”

2. “You Will Be Witnesses of Me”  21
3. “Filled With Holy Spirit”  33
4. “Men Unlettered and Ordinary”  49
5. “We Must Obey God as Ruler”  67
SECTION 2

“Great Persecution Arose Against the
Congregation”

6. Stephen—“Full of Graciousness and
Power”  84
7. Declaring “the Good News About
Jesus”  98
8. The Congregation “Entered Into a
Period of Peace”  113

CHAPTER
SECTION 3

PAGE
“People of the Nations...Received the
Word of God”

9. “God Is Not Partial”  132
10. “The Word of Jehovah Went On
Growing”  147
SECTION 4

“Sent Out by the Holy Spirit”

11. “Filled With Joy and Holy Spirit”  161
12. “Speaking With Boldness by the
Authority of Jehovah”  177
SECTION 5

“The Apostles and the Older Men
Gathered Together”

13. “There Had Occurred No Little
Dissension”  193
14. “We Have Come to a Unanimous
Accord”  208
SECTION 6

“Let Us Return and Visit the Brothers”

15. “Strengthening the Congregations”  226
16. “Step Over Into Macedonia”  243
17. “He Reasoned With Them From the
Scriptures”  260

CHAPTER

PAGE

18. “Seek God, . . . and Really Find Him”  274
19. “Keep On Speaking and Do Not
Keep Silent”  292
SECTION 7

“Teaching...Publicly and From House to
House”

20. “Growing and Prevailing” Despite
Opposition  310
21. “I Am Clean From the Blood of
All Men”  325
22. “Let the Will of Jehovah Take Place”  341
SECTION 8

“Preaching the Kingdom of God...
Without Hindrance”

23. “Hear My Defense” 
24. “Be of Good Courage!” 
25. “I Appeal to Caesar!” 
26. “Not a Soul of You Will Be Lost” 
27. “Bearing Thorough Witness” 

356
373
386
401
418

CONCLUSION

28. “To the Most Distant Part of the Earth”  435

CHAPTER 1


“Go . . . and Make Disciples”
Overview of Acts of Apostles and
how it relates to our day
REBECCA, a young Witness of Jehovah in Ghana, regards her school as her own preaching territory. She
always has Bible-based literature in her schoolbag.
During break time, she looks for opportunities to
give a witness to fellow students. Rebecca has started Bible studies with several of her classmates.
2

On the island of Madagascar, just o? the east

coast of Africa, two pioneers regularly walk some
15 miles in the tropical heat to get to a remote village. There they conduct a number of Bible studies
with interested ones.
To reach people living along the Paraguay and
´
Parana rivers, Witnesses in Paraguay together with
3

volunteers from 15 other countries worked to build a
riverboat. The 45-ton boat can accommodate up to
1-6. Relate an experience showing that Jehovah’s Witnesses preach under a wide variety of circumstances.
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

7

12 people. From this ?oating home, zealous Kingdom
preachers have spread the good news into areas that
were otherwise inaccessible.
4

In the Far North, Witnesses in Alaska take advan-

tage of a unique opportunity to preach during the
summer tourist season. When warmer weather brings
cruise ships loaded with visitors of many di?erent nationalities, local Witnesses station themselves on the
dock with an attractive display of Bible literature in
a wide variety of languages. In that same region, an
airplane proved invaluable in reaching isolated villages, thus allowing the good news to be spread to Aleut,
Athabascan, Tsimshian, and Klinket communities.
5

Larry, in Texas, U.S.A., has a special territory

—the nursing home in which he resides. Although
con?ned to a wheelchair as a result of an accident,
Larry keeps busy. He shares with others the Kingdom
message, including his Bible-based hope that under
Kingdom rule he will one day walk again.—Isa. 35:
5, 6.
6

To attend an assembly in upper Myanmar, a group

of Witnesses made a three-day journey by ferryboat
8

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

from Mandalay. Eager to preach the good news, they
took along Bible literature, which they o?ered to fellow passengers. Each time the ferry stopped at a town
or a village, the energetic preachers got o? and quickly went through the settlement, o?ering literature. In
the meantime, new passengers boarded the ferry, becoming “fresh territory” for the returning Kingdom
publishers.
7

As these few examples show, zealous worship-

pers of Jehovah around the world are “bearing
thorough witness concerning the kingdom of God.”
(Acts 28:23) They call from house to house, approach people on the street, and speak to them over
the phone. Whether riding on a bus, walking in a
park, or taking a break at their place of secular
work, they eagerly look for every opportunity to
give a witness about God’s Kingdom. The specific methods may vary, but the goal is the same
—preach the good news wherever people can be
found.—Matt. 10:11.
7. In what ways do worshippers of Jehovah bear witness about God’s
Kingdom, and what is their goal?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

9

8

Are you, dear reader, among the throngs of King-

dom proclaimers who are now active in more than
235 lands? If so, you play a part in the thrilling expansion of the Kingdom-preaching work! What has
been accomplished in the worldwide ?eld is nothing
short of miraculous. In spite of formidable obstacles
and challenges—even governmental bans and outright
persecution—Jehovah’s Witnesses are giving a thorough witness about God’s Kingdom to people of all
nations.
9

An intriguing question to consider is, Why has

no obstacle, not even satanic opposition, been able
to stop the forward movement of the Kingdompreaching work? To answer that question, we need to
look back to the ?rst century C.E. After all, we
modern-day Witnesses of Jehovah are continuing the
work that started back then.
10

A Far-Reaching Commission
The Founder of the Christian congregation, Jesus

8, 9. (a) Why is the expansion of the Kingdom-preaching work nothing
short of miraculous? (b) What intriguing question is raised, and what do
we need to do to ?nd the answer?
10. To what did Jesus devote himself, and what did he know about this
work?
10

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Christ, devoted himself to the preaching of the good
news of God’s Kingdom; it was his lifework. He once
explained: “I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this I was sent forth.” (Luke
4:43) Jesus knew that he was initiating a work that he
could not complete all by himself. Shortly before his
death, he foretold that the Kingdom message would
be preached “in all the nations.” (Mark 13:10) How,
though, would this be done, and by whom?
11

Following his death and resurrection, Jesus ap-

peared to his disciples and gave them this weighty
commission: “Go therefore and make disciples of
people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit,
teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And, look! I am with you all the days
until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt.
28:19, 20) The words “I am with you” indicated that
the disciples would have his backing in the preaching
and disciple-making work. They would need such
11. What weighty commission did Jesus give his disciples, and what support would they have in carrying it out?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

11

support, for Jesus had foretold that they would be
“objects of hatred by all the nations.” (Matt. 24:9)
The disciples could count on something else for support. Just before ascending to heaven, Jesus told
them that they would be empowered by holy spirit to
be his witnesses “to the most distant part of the
earth.”—Acts 1:8.
12

Now some important questions arise: Did Jesus’

apostles and the other ?rst-century disciples take
their commission seriously? Did this relatively small
band of Christian men and women bear thorough witness about the Kingdom of God even in the face of
vicious persecution? Did they really have heavenly
backing and the support of Jehovah’s holy spirit in
their disciple-making work? These and related questions are answered in the Bible book of Acts. It is vital that we know the answers. Why? Jesus promised that the work he commissioned would continue
“until the conclusion of the system of things.” So this
commission applies to all true Christians, including
those of us living in this time of the end. We there12. What important questions arise, and why is it vital that we know the
answers?
12

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

fore have a keen interest in the historical record contained in the book of Acts.
13

Overview of the B ook of Acts
Who wrote the book of Acts? The book itself nev-

er names its writer, but the opening words make it
clear that the writer of Acts was also the writer of
the Gospel of Luke. (Luke 1:1-4; Acts 1:1, 2) Thus,
from early times, Luke, a “beloved physician” and a
careful historian, has been held to be the writer of
Acts. (Col. 4:14) The book covers a period of about
28 years, from Jesus’ ascension in 33 C.E. to the apostle Paul’s imprisonment in Rome about 61 C.E. The
fact that Luke changes from “they” to “we” in his narrative suggests that he was present at many of the
events that he describes. (Acts 16:8-10; 20:5; 27:1) A
meticulous researcher, Luke no doubt obtained information ?rsthand from Paul, Barnabas, Philip, and
others mentioned in the record.
14

What does the book of Acts contain? Earlier, in

his Gospel, Luke wrote about the things that Jesus
said and did. In the book of Acts, however, Luke
13, 14. (a) Who wrote the book of Acts, and how did the writer obtain
his information? (b) What does the book of Acts contain?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

13

reports what Jesus’ followers said and did. Acts, then,
is about people who accomplished an extraordinary
work, although many of them were viewed by outsiders as “unlettered and ordinary.” (Acts 4:13) In brief,
the inspired record tells us how the Christian congregation was founded and how it grew. Acts shows how
the ?rst-century Christians preached—their methods
and their attitude. (Acts 4:31; 5:42) It highlights the
role of holy spirit in spreading the good news. (Acts
8:29, 39, 40; 13:1-3; 16:6; 18:24, 25) Acts picks up the
Bible’s theme, which involves God’s Kingdom under
Christ, and shows the triumphant spread of the Kingdom message in the face of ?erce opposition.—Acts
8:12; 19:8; 28:30, 31.
15

Indeed, it is thrilling and faith-strengthening to

examine the Bible book of Acts! If we re?ect on the
bold and zealous example of Christ’s early followers,
our hearts will be touched. We will be moved to imitate the faith of our ?rst-century counterparts. We
will thus be better equipped to ful?ll our commission
to “go . . . and make disciples.” The publication that
15. In what ways will we bene?t from examining the book of Acts?
14

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

you are now reading is designed to help you make a
careful study of the book of Acts.
16

A Bible Study Aid to Assist Us
What is the overall purpose of this publica-

tion? The threefold objective of this book is (1) to
strengthen our conviction that Jehovah by means of
his holy spirit is backing the Kingdom-preaching
and disciple-making work, (2) to stimulate our zeal
for the ministry by examining the example of ?rstcentury followers of Christ, and (3) to deepen our respect for Jehovah’s organization and for those taking
the lead in the preaching work and in overseeing the
congregations.
17

How is this publication organized? You will no-

tice that it is divided into eight sections, each covering a portion of the book of Acts. The aim of the
chapters that follow is, not to provide a verse-by-verse
discussion of Acts, but to draw lessons from the
events recounted in that Bible book and help us to
see how we can make personal application of points
16. What is the threefold objective of this publication?
17, 18. How is this publication organized, and what features will prove
helpful in personal Bible study?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

15

learned. At the beginning of each chapter, a focus line
explains the thrust of that chapter and a Scripture citation indicates the portion of Acts that will be discussed.
18

There are other features of this publication that

will prove helpful in personal Bible study. In the regular edition, beautiful artwork portraying exciting
events in the book of Acts will help you to visualize
what was happening as you re?ect on the Bible account. Many chapters include boxes that supply helpful supplementary material. Certain boxes provide a
pro?le of a Bible character whose faith is worthy
of imitation. Some o?er more details about places,
events, customs, or other characters mentioned in
Acts. Wide margins allow you to make notes as you
study.
19

This publication can help you to make an honest

self-examination. No matter how long you have been
serving as a Kingdom publisher, it is good to pause
from time to time and analyze your priorities in life
and your view of the Christian ministry. (2 Cor. 13:5)
Ask yourself: ‘Am I maintaining a sense of urgency in
19. What self-examination should we make from time to time?
16

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

my ministry? (1 Cor. 7:29-31) Am I preaching the
good news with conviction and zeal? (1 Thess. 1:5, 6)
Am I having as full a share as possible in the preaching and disciple-making work?’—Col. 3:23.
20

Let us keep ever in mind that we have been com-

missioned to do an important work—to preach and
make disciples. With each day that passes, the urgency of that commission becomes greater. The end of
this system of things is rapidly approaching. Never before have so many lives been at stake. We do not
know how many more rightly disposed ones may yet
respond to our message. (Acts 13:48) But it is our responsibility to help such ones before it is too late.
—1 Tim. 4:16.
21

It is vital, then, that we imitate the example of

zealous Kingdom preachers of the ?rst century. May
your careful study of this publication move you to
preach with ever greater zeal and boldness. And may
you be strengthened in your determination to continue “bearing thorough witness concerning the kingdom of God.”—Acts 28:23.
20, 21. Why is our commission so urgent, and what should be our determination?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

17

IMPORTANT DATES IN THE SPREAD OF CHRISTIANITY
DURING THE FIRST CENTURY C.E.

33
Jesus resurrected
Jesus commissions his followers
to make disciples
Outpouring of holy spirit at Pentecost
Christian congregation founded

James (son of Zebedee) martyred
Peter imprisoned, miraculously
released

44
Herod Agrippa I dies

c. 33 -34
Stephen martyred
Ethiopian eunuch baptized

c. 46
Foretold famine strikes
Paul brings relief ministration to
Jerusalem

c. 34
Saul of Tarsus converted

c. 47-48
Paul’s first missionary tour

c. 34 -36
Saul preaches in Damascus
c. 36
Paul first visits Jerusalem as follower of Christ
Paul visits Peter in Jerusalem
(Gal. 1:18)
36
Cornelius converted
First Gentiles become Christians
c. 41
Matthew’s Gospel written
Paul’s vision of “the third heaven”
(2 Cor. 12:2)
c. 44
Agabus prophesies famine
18

c. 49
Circumcision issue at Antioch
Conference in Jerusalem
Paul resists Peter (Gal. 2:11-14)
c. 49 -52
Paul’s second missionary tour
Barnabas and Mark preach in
Cyprus
c. 49 -50
Claudius expels Jews from Rome
c. 50
Luke joins Paul at Troas
Paul’s vision of Macedonian man
Paul visits Philippi
Philippian congregation founded

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Thessalonian congregation
founded
Paul visits Athens

c. 59 -61
Paul’s first imprisonment in
Rome

c. 50 -52
Paul visits Corinth
1 Thessalonians written
Galatians written

c. 60 -61
Colossians written
Ephesians written
Philemon written
Philippians written

c. 51
2 Thessalonians written
c. 52-56
Paul’s third missionary tour

c. 60 -65
Mark’s Gospel written

c. 52-55
Paul visits Ephesus

c. 61
Acts written
Hebrews written

c. 55
1 Corinthians written
Titus sent to Corinth
2 Corinthians written

c. 61-64
1 Timothy written
Titus left in Crete (Titus 1:5)
Titus written

c. 56
Romans written
Paul resurrects Eutychus in Troas
Paul and Luke stay with Philip in
Caesarea
Paul arrested in Jerusalem

b. 62
James written

c. 56 -58
Paul in custody in Caesarea
Luke’s Gospel written
c. 58
Festus succeeds Felix
58
Herod Agrippa II hears Paul
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

c. 62-64
1 Peter written
c. 64
2 Peter written
c. 65
Paul’s second imprisonment in
Rome
2 Timothy written
Titus leaves for Dalmatia (2 Tim.
4:10)
Paul executed
19

S E C T I O N 1 ? AC TS 1:1–6:7



“YOU HAVE FILLED
JERUSALEM
WITH YOUR TEACHING”
ACTS 5:28
From the moment the holy spirit was poured out
upon them at Pentecost 33 C.E., Jesus’ disciples
got busy in the work of bearing witness about
God’s Kingdom. In this section, we will consider
the exciting record of the birth of the Christian
congregation, the intensi?ed witness given in Jerusalem, and the apostles’ bold stand in the face
of mounting opposition.

CHAPTER 2



“You Will Be Witnesses of Me”
How Jesus prepared his apostles to
spearhead the preaching work
Based on Acts 1:1-26

THEY do not want it to end. To the apostles, the past
weeks have been thrilling! The resurrection of Jesus
lifted them from the depths of despair to the heights
of joy. For 40 days now, Jesus has appeared repeatedly, further teaching and encouraging his followers.
This day, however, he is appearing for the last time.
2

Standing together on the Mount of Olives, the

apostles hang on Jesus’ every word. When he ?nishes
—all too soon, it seems—he lifts his hands and blesses them. Then, he begins to rise from the earth! His
followers gaze after him as he ascends into the sky.
Finally, a cloud hides him from their view. He is gone,
but they keep staring into the heavens.—Luke 24:50;
Acts 1:9, 10.
3

This scene marks a turning point in the life of

1-3. How does Jesus part from his apostles, and what questions arise?
“YOU WILL BE WITNESSES OF ME”

21

Jesus’ apostles. What will they do now that their Master, Jesus Christ, has ascended to heaven? Rest assured, their Master has prepared them to take up the
work he began. How did he equip them for this important assignment, and how did they respond? And
how are Christians today a?ected? The ?rst chapter
of Acts contains the encouraging answers.
“Many Positive Proofs” (Acts 1:1-5)
4 Luke begins his account by addressing Theophilus, the same man to whom he earlier wrote his Gospel.1 Making it clear that this record is a continuation of the ?rst, Luke begins by summarizing the
events recorded at the end of his Gospel, using different wording and providing some fresh detail.
What will keep the faith of Jesus’ followers
strong? At Acts 1:3, we read: “By many positive
5

1 In his Gospel, Luke addresses this man as “most excellent Theophilus,” suggesting to some that Theophilus might have been a
prominent person who was not yet a believer. Here in Acts, however,
Luke addresses him simply with the words, “O Theophilus.” Some
scholars suggest that Theophilus became a believer after reading
Luke’s Gospel; hence, they say, Luke leaves out the honori?c address
and writes to the man as a spiritual brother.

4. How does Luke open his account recorded in the book of Acts?
5, 6. (a) What will help Jesus’ followers to keep their faith strong?
(b) How is the faith of Christians today based on “many positive
proofs”?
22

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

proofs [Jesus] showed himself alive.” In the Bible,
only “the beloved physician” Luke used the word rendered “positive proofs.” (Col. 4:14) It was a term used
in technical medical writings, and it signi?es evidence
that is demonstrative, conclusive, reliable. Jesus furnished such evidence. He appeared to his followers
many times, sometimes to one or two, sometimes to
all the apostles, and on one occasion to more than
500 believers. (1 Cor. 15:3-6) Positive proofs indeed!
6

The faith of true Christians today is likewise

based on “many positive proofs.” Is there evidence
that Jesus lived on earth, died for our sins, and was
raised up? Absolutely! Reliable eyewitness accounts
in God’s inspired Word provide all the convincing evidence we need. Studying these accounts prayerfully
can greatly strengthen our faith. Remember, solid evidence can make the di?erence between genuine faith
and mere credulity. Real faith is essential to gaining
everlasting life.—John 3:16.
7

Jesus was also “telling the things about the king-

dom of God.” For example, he explained prophecies
that showed that the Messiah would have to su?er
7. Jesus set what example for his followers in teaching and preaching?
“YOU WILL BE WITNESSES OF ME”

23

and die. (Luke 24:13-32, 46, 47) When Jesus clari?ed
his role as the Messiah, he stressed the theme of
God’s Kingdom, for he was King-Designate. The
Kingdom was always the theme of Jesus’ preaching,
and his followers today stick to the same theme as
they preach.—Matt. 24:14; Luke 4:43.
“To the Most Distant Part of the Earth” (Acts 1:6-12)
8 When the apostles gathered on the Mount of Olives, they had their last meeting with Jesus on earth.
Eagerly, they asked: “Lord, are you restoring the
kingdom to Israel at this time?” (Acts 1:6) In this
one question, the apostles revealed two faulty ideas
that they were entertaining. First, they assumed that
God’s Kingdom would be restored to ?eshly Israel.
Second, they expected the promised Kingdom to begin its rule right away, “at this time.” How did Jesus
help them to adjust their thinking?
9

Jesus likely knew that the ?rst notion would be

corrected soon enough. In fact, his followers were
about to witness the birth of a new nation, spiritual
8, 9. (a) What two faulty ideas were Jesus’ apostles entertaining?
(b) How did Jesus adjust the apostles’ thinking, providing what lesson
for Christians today?
24

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Israel, just ten days later! God’s dealings with ?eshly
Israel were almost at an end. As to the second idea,
Jesus kindly reminded them: “It does not belong to
you to get knowledge of the times or seasons which
the Father has placed in his own jurisdiction.” (Acts
1:7) Jehovah is the Great Timekeeper. Before Jesus
died, he himself said that even the Son did not then
know the “day and hour” when the end would come
but “only the Father.” (Matt. 24:36) To this day, if
Christians become unduly concerned about the timing of the end of this system of things, they are, in effect, worrying about what does not belong to them.
10

Still, we should be careful not to look down on

Jesus’ apostles, who were men of great faith. They
humbly accepted correction. What is more, although
their question sprang from faulty thinking, it also revealed a good attitude. Jesus had repeatedly urged
his followers: “Keep on the watch.” (Matt. 24:42; 25:
13; 26:41) They were spiritually alert, eagerly watching for evidence that Jehovah was about to act. That
is the attitude we need to cultivate today. In fact,
10. What attitude of the apostles should we cultivate, and why?
“YOU WILL BE WITNESSES OF ME”

25

these climactic “last days” make it ever more urgent
that we do so.—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
Jesus reminded the apostles of what should be
their main concern. He said: “You will receive power
when the holy spirit arrives upon you, and you will
be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant part of the
earth.” (Acts 1:8) In Jerusalem, where people had put
Jesus to death, the news of his resurrection would be
proclaimed ?rst. From there, the message would radiate outward into all of Judea, then to Samaria, then
far beyond.
11

Fittingly, Jesus mentioned the preaching commission only after renewing his promise to send the holy
spirit to help them. This is one of more than 40 times
that the expression “holy spirit” occurs in the book
of Acts. Again and again, this vivid Bible book makes
it clear that we cannot accomplish Jehovah’s will
without the aid of holy spirit. How important it is,
then, that we pray for that spirit regularly! (Luke 11:
13) We need it now more than ever.
12

11, 12. (a) Jesus gave his followers what commission? (b) Why was it
?tting for Jesus to mention the holy spirit in connection with the commission to preach?
26

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

13

The meaning of what constitutes “the most dis-

tant part of the earth” has changed since those days.
As noted in the preceding chapter, however, Jehovah’s Witnesses have wholeheartedly accepted this assignment to witness, knowing that God wants all
sorts of people to hear the good news of his Kingdom. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Are you immersed in this lifesaving work? You will not be able to ?nd a more ful?lling, satisfying work anywhere! Jehovah will give you
the power you need to do it. The book of Acts will
tell you much about the right methods to use and the
attitude to develop in order to be e?ective.
14

As mentioned at the outset of this chapter, Jesus

rose from the earth and disappeared from view. Yet,
the 11 apostles kept standing there, looking into the
sky. Finally, two angels appeared and o?ered this gentle rebuke: “Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus who was received up
from you into the sky will come thus in the same
13. How extensive is the preaching assignment given to God’s people today, and why should we embrace it eagerly?
14, 15. (a) What did the angels say about Christ’s return, and what did
they mean? (See also footnote.) (b) How did Christ’s return prove to be
“in the same manner” as his departure?
“YOU WILL BE WITNESSES OF ME”

27

manner as you have beheld him going into the sky.”
(Acts 1:11) Did the angels mean that Jesus would return in the same body, as some religionists teach? No,
they did not. How do we know?
15

The angels said that Jesus would return, not in

the same form, but “in the same manner.”1 In what
manner did he depart? He was out of sight when the
angels spoke. Only those few men, the apostles, perceived that Jesus had left the vicinity of the earth and
was on his way to his Father in heaven. The manner
of Christ’s return was to be similar. So it has been.
Today, only those with spiritual discernment realize
that Jesus is present in kingly power. (Luke 17:20) We
need to discern the evidence of his presence and convey it to others so that they too may see the urgency
of our times.

16

“Designate Which One . . . You Have Chosen”
(Acts 1:13-26)
It is little wonder that the apostles “returned to

1 Here the Bible uses the Greek word tropos, denoting “manner,”
and not mor·phe, meaning “form.”

16-18. (a) From Acts 1:13, 14, what do we learn about Christian gatherings for worship? (b) What can we learn from the example set by
Jesus’ mother, Mary? (c) Why are Christian meetings vital today?
28

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Jerusalem with great joy.” (Luke 24:52) How, though,
would they respond to Christ’s guidance and instruction? In verses 13 and 14 of Acts chapter 1, we ?nd
them gathered in an “upper chamber,” and we learn
some interesting details about such gatherings. Houses in Palestine at that time often had an upstairs
chamber, accessible by an outside stairway. Might
this “upper chamber” have been atop the house mentioned at Acts 12:12, which belonged to the mother of
Mark? At any rate, it was likely a simple, functional
place for Christ’s followers to gather. But who gathered, and what did they do?
17

Notice that the gathering was not limited to the

apostles, nor just to men. “Some women” were there,
including Jesus’ mother, Mary. This is the last direct
mention of her in the Bible. It is ?tting to think of
her in that setting, not seeking prominence, but humbly gathering to worship with her spiritual brothers
and sisters. It must have been a comfort to her that
her four other sons, who had not been believers during Jesus’ lifetime, were now with her. (Matt. 13:55;
John 7:5) Since their half brother’s death and resurrection, they were changed men.—1 Cor. 15:7.
“YOU WILL BE WITNESSES OF ME”

29

18

Note, too, why these disciples gathered: “With

one accord all these were persisting in prayer.” (Acts
1:14) Gathering together has always been essential to
Christian worship. We gather to encourage one another, to receive instruction and counsel and, above
all, to join in worship of our heavenly Father, Jehovah. Our prayers and songs of praise at such times
are very pleasing to him and vital for us. May we never forsake these sacred and upbuilding gatherings!
—Heb. 10:24, 25.
19

Those followers of Christ now faced an impor-

tant organizational need, and the apostle Peter took
the lead in addressing it. (Verses 15-26) Is it not comforting to note how far Peter had come in the weeks
since he had three times denied his Lord? (Mark 14:
72) We are all prone to sin, and we need reminders
that Jehovah is “good and ready to forgive” those
who sincerely repent.—Ps. 86:5.
20

Peter perceived that Judas, the apostle who had

betrayed Jesus, should be replaced. But by whom?
19-21. (a) What do we learn from the active role that Peter played in
the congregation? (b) Why did Judas need to be replaced, and what can
we learn from the way the matter was handled?
30

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Peter said that the new apostle should be one who
had followed Jesus throughout His ministry and had
witnessed His resurrection. (Acts 1:21, 22) That was
in harmony with Jesus’ own promise: “You who have
followed me will also yourselves sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” (Matt.
19:28) Jehovah evidently purposed to have 12 apostles who followed Jesus during his earthly ministry
form the future “twelve foundation stones” of New
Jerusalem. (Rev. 21:2, 14) God thus allowed Peter to
see that the prophecy, “his o?ce of oversight let
someone else take,” applied to Judas.—Ps. 109:8.
21

How was the selection made? By casting lots, a

common practice in Bible times. (Prov. 16:33) However, this is the last time that the Bible shows lots
being used in this way. Evidently, the later outpouring of holy spirit rendered that method obsolete. Note, though, why lots were used. The apostles
prayed: “You, O Jehovah, who know the hearts of all,
designate which one of these two men you have chosen.” (Acts 1:23, 24) They wanted the choice to be
Jehovah’s. Matthias, likely one of the 70 disciples
“YOU WILL BE WITNESSES OF ME”

31

whom Jesus had sent out to preach, was chosen.
Thus, Matthias became one of “the twelve.”1—Acts
6:2.
22

This incident reminds us of the importance of or-

ganization among God’s people. To this day, responsible men are selected to serve as overseers in the
congregation. The elders carefully consider the Scriptural quali?cations required of such overseers, and
they pray for the guidance of holy spirit. The congregation thus views such men as appointed by holy spirit. For our part, we remain submissive and obedient
to their lead, promoting a cooperative spirit in the
congregation.—Heb. 13:17.
23

Now that those disciples had been strengthened

by Jesus’ resurrection appearances and forti?ed by
organizational re?nements, they were fully prepared
for what lay ahead. The next chapter will discuss that
momentous event.
1 Paul was later appointed to be “an apostle to the nations,” but he
was never reckoned among the 12. (Rom. 11:13; 1 Cor. 15:4-8) He had
not followed Jesus during His earthly ministry, so he did not qualify for that special privilege.

22, 23. Why should we be submissive and obedient to those taking the
lead in the congregation today?
32

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 3



“Filled With Holy Spirit”
The e?ects of the outpouring of
holy spirit at Pentecost
Based on Acts 2:1-47

THE streets of Jerusalem are bustling with excitement.1 Smoke ascends from the temple altar as the Levites sing the Hallel (Psalms 113 to 118), likely in antiphonal, or call-and-response, style. Visitors crowd the
streets. They have come from such far-?ung places as
Elam, Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Egypt, and
Rome.2 What is the occasion? Pentecost, also called
“the day of the ?rst ripe fruits.” (Num. 28:26) This annual festival marks the end of the barley harvest and
the beginning of the wheat harvest. It is a joyous day.
2

At about nine o’clock on this mild spring morning

in 33 C.E., something happens that will be marveled at
1 See the box “Jerusalem—The Center of Judaism,” on page 34.
2 See the boxes “Rome—Capital of an Empire,” on page 35; “Jews
in Mesopotamia and Egypt,” on page 36; and “Christianity in Pontus,” on page 37.

1. Describe the atmosphere of the Festival of Pentecost.
2. What amazing events occur at Pentecost 33 C.E.?
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

33

JERUSALEM
—THE CENTER OF JUDAISM

Much of the action of the ?rst chapters of Acts takes
place in Jerusalem. This city stands among the hills of
Judea’s central mountain range, about 34 miles east of
the Mediterranean Sea. In 1070 B.C.E., King David
conquered the hilltop fortress of Mount Zion, located
here, and the city that grew up around it became the
capital of the ancient nation of Israel.
Close by Mount Zion stands Mount Moriah, where,
according to ancient Jewish tradition, Abraham
attempted to sacri?ce Isaac, some 1,900 years before
the events described in Acts. Mount Moriah became
part of the city when Solomon built the ?rst temple
of Jehovah atop it. This edi?ce came to be the focal
point of Jewish public life and worship.
It was to Jehovah’s temple that all devout Jews
regularly gathered from all over the inhabited earth
to sacri?ce, worship, and observe seasonal festivals.
They did so in obedience to God’s command: “Three
times in the year every male of yours should appear
before Jehovah your God in the place that he will
choose.” (Deut. 16:16) Jerusalem was also the seat
of the Great Sanhedrin, the Jewish high court and
national administrative council.
34

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ROME—CAPITAL OF AN EMPIRE



During the period of time covered by the book of
Acts, Rome was the largest and politically the most important city in the then-known world. It was the capital
of an empire that at its peak dominated lands stretching
from Britain to North Africa and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf.
Rome was a melting pot of cultures, races, languages,
and superstitions. A network of well-maintained roads
brought travelers and merchandise from every corner of
the empire. At the nearby port of Ostia, ships that plied
busy trade routes unloaded foodstu?s and luxury goods
destined for the city.
By the ?rst century C.E., well over a million people
lived in Rome. Perhaps half of the population were
slaves—condemned criminals, children sold or abandoned by their parents, and prisoners captured during
campaigns by the Roman legions. Among those brought
to Rome as slaves were Jews from Jerusalem, following
the conquest of that city by Roman General Pompey in
63 B.C.E.
Most of the free population were paupers, who lived
in crowded multistory housing and depended on government subsidies. The emperors, however, adorned their
capital with some of the most magni?cent public buildings ever seen. Among them were theaters and great
stadiums that o?ered such spectacles as stage performances, gladiatorial contests, and chariot racing—all
free for the entertainment of the masses.
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

35

JEWS IN MES OP OTAMIA AND EGYPT



The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus
Christ (175 B.C.–A.D. 135) states: “In Mesopotamia, Media and Babylonia lived the descendants of members of
the kingdom of the ten tribes [of Israel], and of the
kingdom of Judah, once deported there by the Assyrians and the Babylonians.” According to Ezra 2:64,
only 42,360 Israelite men, along with their wives and
children, returned to Jerusalem from their Babylonian
exile. This took place in 537 B.C.E. Flavius Josephus
remarks that in the ?rst century C.E., the Jews who
“dwelt about Babylonia” numbered into the tens of
thousands. In the third to the ?fth centuries C.E.,
these communities produced the work known as the
Babylonian Talmud.
Documentary evidence exists of a Jewish presence
in Egypt at least as early as the sixth century B.C.E.
During that period, Jeremiah directed a message to
Jews living in various localities of Egypt, including
Memphis. (Jer. 44:1, ftn.) It is likely that large numbers immigrated to Egypt during the Hellenistic period. Josephus says that Jews were among the ?rst settlers of Alexandria. In time, an entire section of this
city was allotted to them. In the ?rst century C.E.,
Jewish writer Philo asserted that a million of his fellow countrymen lived throughout Egypt, from “the
side of Libya to the boundaries of Ethiopia.”
36

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHRISTIANITY IN P ONTUS



Among those who heard Peter’s speech at Pentecost 33 C.E. were Jews from Pontus, a district of
northern Asia Minor. (Acts 2:9) Evidently, some of
them took the good news back to their homeland,
for those to whom Peter addressed his ?rst letter included believers who were “scattered about” in such
places as Pontus.1 (1 Pet. 1:1) His writing reveals that
these Christians had been “grieved by various trials”
because of their faith. (1 Pet. 1:6) Likely, this included
opposition and persecution.
Further tests faced by Christians in Pontus are alluded to in correspondence between Pliny the Younger, governor of the Roman province of Bithynia and
Pontus, and Emperor Trajan. Writing from Pontus
in about 112 C.E., Pliny reported that the “contagion” of Christianity threatened everyone, regardless
of gender, age, or rank. Pliny gave those accused of being Christians opportunity to deny it, and those who
would not, he executed. Any who cursed Christ or recited a prayer to the gods or to Trajan’s statue were released. Pliny acknowledged that these were things
that “those who are really Christians cannot be made
to do.”
1 The phrase rendered “scattered about” comes from a Greek
word that means “of the Diaspora.” The term has Jewish overtones,
indicating that many of the ?rst converts were from Jewish communities.
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

37

for centuries to come. Suddenly, there occurs from
heaven “a noise just like that of a rushing sti? breeze,”
or “like the roaring of a mighty windstorm.” (Acts 2:2;
International Standard Version) The loud sound ?lls the
house where about 120 disciples of Jesus are gathered.
Next, something amazing takes place. Tongues as if of
?re become visible, and one sits upon each of the disciples.1 Then, the disciples become “?lled with holy
spirit” and begin speaking in foreign languages! When
the disciples leave the house, those visitors they encounter on the streets of Jerusalem are astonished, for
the disciples are able to speak to them! Indeed, each
one hears them “speaking in his own language.”—Acts
2:1-6.
3 This stirring account describes a milestone in true
worship—the founding of the nation of spiritual Israel, the anointed Christian congregation. (Gal. 6:16)
But there is more. When Peter addressed the crowd
that day, he used the ?rst of three “keys of the king1 The “tongues” were, not of literal ?re, but “as if of ?re,” evidently indicating that the observable manifestation upon each disciple
had the appearance and radiance of ?re.

3. (a) Why can Pentecost 33 C.E. be called a milestone in the history of
true worship? (b) How did Peter’s speech tie in with the use of “the keys
of the kingdom”?
38

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

dom,” each of which would open up special privileges
to a di?erent group of people. (Matt. 16:18, 19) This
?rst key made it possible for Jews and Jewish proselytes to accept the good news and to be anointed with
God’s holy spirit.1 They would thus become part of
spiritual Israel, and as such, they would have the hope
of ruling as kings and priests in the Messianic Kingdom. (Rev. 5:9, 10) In time, that privilege would be extended to Samaritans and then to Gentiles. What can
Christians today learn from the momentous events of
Pentecost 33 C.E.?
“All Together at the S ame Place” (Acts 2:1-4)
4

The Christian congregation began with about

120 disciples who were “all together at the same
place”—an upper room—and who were anointed
with holy spirit. (Acts 2:1) By the end of that day,
baptized members of that congregation numbered
into the thousands. And that was just the beginning of the growth of an organization that continues
to expand today! Yes, a community of God-fearing
1 See the box “Who Were the Proselytes?” on page 40.

4. How is the modern-day Christian congregation an extension of the
congregation that was formed in 33 C.E.?
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

39

WHO WERE THE PRO SELYTES?



“Both Jews and proselytes” heard Peter’s preaching
at Pentecost 33 C.E.—Acts 2:10.
Among the quali?ed men appointed to care for the
“necessary business” of the daily distribution of food
was Nicolaus, who is identi?ed as “a proselyte of
Antioch.” (Acts 6:3-5) Proselytes were Gentiles, that
is, non-Jews, who had converted to Judaism. They
were considered Jews in all respects, since they
accepted the God and the Law of Israel, rejected
all other gods, underwent circumcision (if male), and
joined themselves to the nation of Israel.
After the Jews were released from exile in Babylon
in 537 B.C.E., many settled far from the land of Israel
but continued to practice Judaism. By this means,
people throughout the ancient Near East and beyond
became acquainted with the Jewish religion. Ancient
writers, such as Horace and Seneca, testify that
multitudes in di?erent lands who were attracted to
the Jews and their beliefs joined their communities
and became proselytes.

men and women—the modern-day Christian congregation—is the means by which the “good news of the
kingdom” is being “preached in all the inhabited
40

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

earth for a witness to all the nations” before the end
of this system of things.—Matt. 24:14.
5 The Christian congregation would also be a source
of spiritual strength to its members, both those of the
anointed and, later on, those of the “other sheep.”
(John 10:16) Paul showed his appreciation for the mutual support that members of the congregation provide when he wrote to the Christians in Rome: “I am
longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual
gift to you in order for you to be made ?rm; or, rather,
that there may be an interchange of encouragement
among you, by each one through the other’s faith, both
yours and mine.”—Rom. 1:11, 12.
6 Today, the Christian congregation has the same objectives that it had in the ?rst century. Jesus gave his
disciples a challenging yet thrilling work to perform.
He told them: “Make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.”—Matt.
28:19, 20.
5. What blessing would come from associating with the Christian congregation, both in the ?rst century and today?
6, 7. How is the Christian congregation today ful?lling Jesus’ commission to preach to all nations?
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

41

The Christian congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses
is the agency through which that work is accomplished today. Of course, it is a challenge to reach people of di?erent languages. Yet, Jehovah’s Witnesses
have produced Bible literature in more than 400 languages. If you are actively associated with the Christian congregation and are sharing in the Kingdompreaching and disciple-making work, you have reason
to rejoice. You are counted among the comparatively
few on earth today who have the privilege of bearing
thorough witness to Jehovah’s name!
8 To help you endure with joy during these critical
times, Jehovah God has provided a worldwide association of brothers. Paul wrote to the Hebrew Christians:
“Let us consider one another to incite to love and ?ne
works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) The Christian congregation
is a provision from Jehovah so that you can encourage
others and also be encouraged yourself. Stay close to
your spiritual brothers and sisters. Never forsake gathering together at Christian meetings!
7

8. In what way are congregation members individually blessed?
42

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“Each One Heard . . . in His Own Language”
(Acts 2:5-13)
9 Imagine the excitement that must have surged
through the mixed company of Jews and proselytes at
Pentecost 33 C.E. Most of those present likely spoke a
common language, perhaps Greek or Hebrew. But now
“each one heard [the disciples] speaking in his own
language.” (Acts 2:6) Surely those listeners must have
been touched to hear the good news in their mother
tongue. Of course, Christians today are not gifted with
a miraculous ability to speak foreign tongues. Many,
however, have made themselves available to spread the
Kingdom message to people of all national groups.
How? Some have learned a new language so that they
can serve with a nearby foreign-language congregation
or even move to a foreign land. Often, they have found
that their listeners are quite impressed by their e?orts.
10 Consider Christine, who took a Gujarati course
along with seven other Witnesses. When she encountered a Gujarati-speaking workmate, she greeted the
young woman in her native tongue. The woman was
impressed and wanted to know why Christine was
9, 10. How have some made themselves available to reach out to those
who speak a di?erent language?
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

43

making the e?ort to learn Gujarati. Christine was able
to give a ?ne witness. The young woman remarked
to Christine: “No other religion would encourage its
members to learn such a di?cult language. You must
really have something important to say.”
11

Of course, not all of us can learn another lan-

guage. Nevertheless, we can be prepared to preach the
Kingdom message to people of other language groups.
How? One way is by using the publication Good News
for People of All Nations. This booklet contains a brief
message in many di?erent languages. Consider one experience in which this publication was put to good
use. A Witness family visited three national parks
shortly after the booklet was released. There they met
people from India, the Netherlands, Pakistan, and the
Philippines. The husband noted: “Though all these
people spoke some English, they were impressed when
we showed them the message in their own language,
since they were thousands of miles from home. The
worldwide nature of our work as well as our unity became clear to them.”
11. How can the booklet Good News for People of All Nations be put
to good use?
44

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“Peter Stood Up” (Acts 2:14-37)
12 “Peter stood up” to speak to the multinational
crowd. (Acts 2:14) He explained to all who would listen that the miraculous ability to speak in di?erent
languages had been granted by God in ful?llment of
the prophecy uttered by Joel: “I shall pour out my
spirit on every sort of ?esh.” (Joel 2:28) Prior to his ascension to heaven, Jesus told his disciples: “I will request the Father and he will give you another helper,”
which Jesus identi?ed as “the spirit.”—John 14:16, 17.
13 Peter’s concluding words to the crowd were ?rm:
“Let all the house of Israel know for a certainty
that God made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus
whom you impaled.” (Acts 2:36) Of course, most of Peter’s listeners were not personally present when Jesus was put to death on the torture stake. Yet, as a
nation they bore community responsibility for this
act. Note, though, that Peter addressed his fellow
Jews respectfully and appealed to their hearts. Peter’s
goal was to move his listeners to repentance, not to
12. (a) How had the prophet Joel alluded to the miraculous event that
took place at Pentecost 33 C.E.? (b) Why had a ?rst-century ful?llment
of Joel’s prophecy been expected?
13, 14. How did Peter strive to reach the hearts of his listeners, and how
can we imitate his approach?
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

45

condemn them. Did the crowd listening take o?ense at
Peter’s words? By no means. Instead, the people were
“stabbed to the heart.” They asked: “What shall we
do?” Peter’s positive approach likely played a role in
his reaching the hearts of many, so that they were
moved to repent.—Acts 2:37.
14 We can imitate Peter’s manner of appealing to
hearts. When witnessing to others, we need not take issue with every unscriptural view that the householder
may express. Rather, we would do well to build on
points on which we can agree. If we establish common
ground with our listener, we can then tactfully reason
from God’s Word. Often, when Bible truths are presented in such a positive fashion, righthearted ones
are more likely to respond favorably.
“Let Each One of You
B e Baptized” (Acts 2:38-47)
15 On the thrilling day of Pentecost 33 C.E., Peter
said to responsive Jews and proselytes: “Repent, and
let each one of you be baptized.” (Acts 2:38) As a result, about 3,000 were baptized, likely in pools in or
15. (a) What statement did Peter make, and what was the response?
(b) Why could thousands who heard the good news at Pentecost qualify
to be baptized on the same day?
46

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

near Jerusalem.1 Was this an impulsive act? Does this
account serve as a precedent for Bible students and for
children of Christian parents to rush into baptism before they are ready? Not at all. Remember, those Jews
and Jewish proselytes who were baptized on the day of
Pentecost 33 C.E. were keen students of God’s Word,
and they were part of a nation that had been dedicated to Jehovah. Moreover, they were already demonstrating their zeal—in some cases, by traveling great
distances to be present at this annual festival. After
accepting the vital truths concerning Jesus Christ’s
role in the outworking of God’s purpose, they were
ready to continue serving God—but now as baptized
followers of Christ.
16

Jehovah’s blessing was certainly on that group.

The account relates: “All those who became believers were together in having all things in common, and
they went selling their possessions and properties
and distributing the proceeds to all, just as anyone
1 By comparison, on August 7, 1993, at an international convention
of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Kiev, Ukraine, 7,402 persons were baptized
in six pools. The entire baptism took two hours and ?fteen minutes
to complete.

16. How did ?rst-century Christians show a self-sacri?cing spirit?
“FILLED WITH HOLY SPIRIT”

47

would have the need.”1 (Acts 2:44, 45) Surely all true
Christians want to imitate that loving, self-sacri?cing
spirit.
17 Christian dedication and baptism involve several
necessary Scriptural steps. A person must take in
knowledge of God’s Word. (John 17:3) He needs to
exercise faith and must repent over his past course,
demonstrating true sorrow over it. (Acts 3:19) Then
he must convert, or turn around, and start engaging
in right works that are in harmony with God’s will.
(Rom. 12:2; Eph. 4:23, 24) These steps are followed
by his making a dedication to God in prayer and then
getting baptized.—Matt. 16:24; 1 Pet. 3:21.
18 Are you a dedicated, baptized disciple of Jesus
Christ? If so, be grateful for the privilege that has
been extended to you. Like the ?rst-century disciples
who were ?lled with holy spirit, you can be used in
a powerful way to bear thorough witness and do the
will of Jehovah!
1 This temporary arrangement ?lled the need that arose because
visitors remained in Jerusalem to take in further spiritual enlightenment. This was a voluntary sharing and is not to be confused with
some form of communism.—Acts 5:1-4.

17. What steps are necessary for a person to qualify for baptism?
18. What privilege is open to baptized disciples of Christ?
48

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 4



“Men Unlettered and Ordinary”
The apostles take bold action,
and Jehovah blesses them
Based on Acts 3:1–5:11

THE afternoon sun slants onto the milling crowd.
Devout Jews and disciples of Christ are ?ling into
the temple compound. Soon it will be “the hour of
prayer.”1 (Acts 2:46; 3:1) Among the throng, Peter and
John edge toward the temple gate called Beautiful,
which has an impressive set of doors overlaid in glowing Corinthian bronze. Above the clamor of conversation and the sound of shu?ing feet, a middle-aged beggar, crippled from birth, calls for alms.—Acts 3:2; 4:22.
As Peter and John draw close, the beggar recites his
well-worn plea for money. The apostles stop, catching
the hopeful man’s attention. “Silver and gold I do not
possess,” Peter states, “but what I do have is what I
give you: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene,
2

1 Prayers were o?ered at the temple in conjunction with the morning and evening sacri?ces. The evening sacri?ce was held at “the
ninth hour,” or about three in the afternoon.

1, 2. What miracle did Peter and John perform near the temple gate?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

49

walk!” Picture the astonishment of the crowd as Peter
takes the crippled man by the hand and—for the ?rst
time in his life—the man stands upright! (Acts 3:6, 7)
Can you just see the man gazing down at his healed
limbs and taking his ?rst tentative steps? No wonder
he begins leaping about and loudly praising God!
3

The ecstatic crowd runs to Peter and John at Solo-

mon’s colonnade. Here, at the very place where Jesus
once stood and taught, Peter informs them of the real
signi?cance of what just happened. (John 10:23) He offers to the crowd and the formerly crippled man a gift
worth more than silver or gold. This gift involves much
more than restored health. It is the opportunity to repent, to have their sins blotted out, and to become followers of Jehovah’s appointed “Chief Agent of life,”
Jesus Christ.—Acts 3:15.
4

What a remarkable day! One person was healed

physically and could now walk. Thousands more were
given the opportunity to be healed spiritually so that
they could walk worthily of God. (Col. 1:9, 10) In ad3. What surpassing gift could the formerly crippled man and the crowd
receive?
4. (a) The miraculous healing set the stage for what confrontation? (b)
What two questions will we answer?
50

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

dition, the events of that day set the stage for a confrontation between loyal followers of Christ and people in power who would try to prevent them from
ful?lling Jesus’ command to preach the Kingdom message. (Acts 1:8) What can we learn from the methods
used and the manner displayed by Peter and John
—“men unlettered and ordinary”—as they witnessed
to the crowd?1 (Acts 4:13) And how can we imitate the
way they and the other disciples dealt with opposition?
5

Not “by Personal Power” (Acts 3:11-26)
Peter and John stood before the crowd, knowing

that some there may have recently clamored for Jesus to be impaled. (Mark 15:8-15; Acts 3:13-15) Think
of the courage Peter displayed as he boldly declared
that the crippled man was healed in Jesus’ name. Peter did not water down the truth. He forthrightly condemned the crowd’s complicity in the death of Christ.
But Peter harbored no animosity toward these people, for they had “acted in ignorance.” (Acts 3:17)
He appealed to them as his brothers and focused on
1 See the boxes “Peter—From Fisherman to Dynamic Apostle,” on
page 52, and “John—The Disciple Whom Jesus Loved,” on page 56.

5. What do we learn from the way Peter addressed the crowd?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

51

PETER—FROM FISHERMAN TO
DYNAMIC AP O STLE

Peter is identi?ed by ?ve names in the Scriptures.
He is known as Symeon in Hebrew and its Greek
equivalent, Simon, and as Peter and its Semitic equivalent, Cephas. The apostle is also identi?ed as Simon
Peter, a combination of two names.—Matt. 10:2; John
1:42; Acts 15:14.
Peter was married and shared his home with his
mother-in-law and brother. (Mark 1:29-31) He was a
?sherman from Bethsaida, a town on the north side
of the Sea of Galilee. (John 1:44) He later lived nearby in Capernaum. (Luke 4:31, 38) It was in Peter’s
boat that Jesus sat when addressing a multitude that
gathered on the shore of the Sea of Galilee. Immediately afterward, at Jesus’ direction, Peter hauled in a
miraculous catch of ?sh. Peter fell to his knees in
fear, but Jesus said to him: “Stop being afraid. From
now on you will be catching men alive.” (Luke 5:1-11)
Peter ?shed with his brother Andrew, as well as with
James and John. All four abandoned their ?shing
business when they accepted Jesus’ invitation to become his followers. (Matt. 4:18-22; Mark 1:16-18)
About a year later, Peter was among the 12 whom Jesus chose to be his “apostles,” meaning “sent-forth
ones.”—Mark 3:13-16.
Jesus selected Peter, James, and John to accompany him on special occasions. They witnessed Je52

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

sus’ trans?guration, saw him resurrect Jairus’ daughter, and shared his grief in the garden of Gethsemane.
(Matt. 17:1, 2; 26:36-46; Mark 5:22-24, 35-42; Luke
22:39-46) The same three, along with Andrew, questioned Jesus regarding the sign of his presence.
—Mark 13:1-4.
Peter was forthright, dynamic, and sometimes
impulsive. It seems that he often spoke up before
his fellows did. The Gospels record his words
more often than those of the other 11 apostles put
together. Peter raised questions while the others
remained silent. (Matt. 15:15; 18:21; 19:27-29; Luke
12:41; John 13:36-38) He was the one who objected
to Jesus’ washing his feet and then, on being
reproved, asked Jesus to wash also his hands and
head!—John 13:5-10.
Strong feelings moved Peter to try to persuade Jesus that He would not have to su?er and be killed. Jesus ?rmly corrected him for that lapse in judgment.
(Matt. 16:21-23) During Jesus’ ?nal night on earth,
Peter declared that even though all the other apostles
might abandon Jesus, he never would. When Jesus’
enemies arrested Him, courage moved Peter to defend Jesus with the sword and later to follow him
right into the courtyard of the high priest. Yet, not
long afterward, Peter denied his Master three times
and then wept bitterly when he realized what he had
done.—Matt. 26:31-35, 51, 52, 69-75.
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

53

Shortly before Jesus’ ?rst post-resurrection appearance to his apostles in Galilee, Peter announced that
he was going ?shing, and other apostles joined him.
On recognizing Jesus on the beach, Peter impulsively
plunged into the water and swam ashore. At the
breakfast of ?sh that Jesus cooked for his apostles,
Jesus asked Peter if he loved him more than “these”
—that is, the ?sh that were before them. Jesus was
urging Peter to choose to follow him full-time rather
than pursue a career, such as the ?shing business.
—John 21:1-22.
In about 62-64 C.E., Peter preached the good news
in Babylon, in modern-day Iraq, where there was a
large Jewish population. (1 Pet. 5:13) In Babylon, Peter composed the ?rst and possibly the second of the
two inspired letters bearing his name. Jesus entrusted Peter with “powers necessary for an apostleship to
those who are circumcised.” (Gal. 2:8, 9) With compassion and vigor, Peter ful?lled his commission.

the positive aspects of the Kingdom message. If they
repented and put faith in Christ, “seasons of refreshing” would come to them from Jehovah. (Acts 3:19) We
likewise need to be bold and forthright when declaring
God’s coming judgment. At the same time, we should
never be brash, harsh, or judgmental. Instead, we view
54

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

those to whom we preach as our potential brothers,
and like Peter, we focus especially on the positive aspects of the Kingdom message.
The apostles were modest men. They did not take
credit for the miraculous deed they had performed. Peter said to the crowd: “Why are you gazing at us as
though by personal power or godly devotion we have
made him walk?” (Acts 3:12) Peter and the other apostles knew that any good they accomplished in their
ministry was due to God’s power, not their own. As
a result, they modestly directed all praise for their
achievements to Jehovah and Jesus.
6

We need to show similar modesty as we engage in
the Kingdom-preaching work. Granted, God’s spirit
does not empower modern-day Christians to perform
miraculous healings. Even so, we can help people to
develop faith in God and Christ and to receive the
same gift Peter o?ered—the opportunity to have their
sins forgiven and to be refreshed by Jehovah. Each
year, hundreds of thousands accept this o?er and become baptized disciples of Christ.
7

6. How did Peter and John display humility and modesty?
7, 8. (a) What gift can we o?er to people? (b) How is the promise of a
“restoration of all things” being ful?lled today?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

55

JOHN—THE DIS CIPLE
WHOM JESUS LOVED

The apostle John was a son of Zebedee and the
brother of the apostle James. It seems that his mother’s name was Salome, who was possibly the sister
of Mary, the mother of Jesus. (Matt. 10:2; 27:55, 56;
Mark 15:40; Luke 5:9, 10) So John may have been a relative of Jesus. John’s family appears to have been materially prosperous. Zebedee’s ?shing business was
large enough to have hired men. (Mark 1:20) Salome
accompanied Jesus, ministered to him when he was in
Galilee, and later brought spices to prepare Jesus’
body for burial. (Mark 16:1; John 19:40) John probably had a house of his own.—John 19:26, 27.
John was likely the disciple of John the Baptizer who was standing with Andrew when John the Baptizer looked at Jesus and said: “See, the Lamb of
God!” (John 1:35, 36, 40) Following this introduction,
John the son of Zebedee evidently accompanied Jesus to Cana and was an eyewitness to Jesus’ ?rst miracle. (John 2:1-11) The vividness and detail with which
John describes Jesus’ subsequent activity in Jerusalem, Samaria, and Galilee suggest that the Gospel
writer may also have witnessed these events. The
readiness with which John—like James, Peter, and Andrew—abandoned his ?shing nets, boat, and livelihood when Jesus called him to be His follower testi?es to his faith.—Matt. 4:18-22.
56

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

John does not appear as prominently as Peter does
in the Gospel accounts. However, John too had a vigorous personality, as evidenced by the surname
that Jesus gave to him and his brother James—Boanerges, meaning “Sons of Thunder.” (Mark 3:17) Initially, John was ambitious for prominence, so much
so that he and his brother got their mother to ask
Jesus to give her sons privileged positions in his Kingdom. While this desire was sel?sh, it was also evidence
of their faith in the reality of the Kingdom. The brothers’ ambition gave Jesus occasion to admonish all his
apostles regarding the need for humility.—Matt.
20:20-28.
John manifested his strong character when he tried
to prevent a certain man who was not one of Jesus’ followers from expelling demons in His name. On another occasion, John was ready to call down ?re from
heaven to destroy the inhabitants of a Samaritan village who were unresponsive when Jesus sent messengers to make some preparations for him. For these
reactions, Jesus rebuked John. Evidently, as time went
by, John developed the balance and mercy that he
once seemed to lack. (Luke 9:49-56) Despite his shortcomings, however, John was “the disciple whom Jesus
used to love.” Thus, when He was about to die, Jesus
entrusted his own mother, Mary, to John’s care.
—John 19:26, 27; 21:7, 20, 24.
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

57

John outlived the other apostles, just as Jesus had
prophesied that he would. (John 21:20-22) John served
Jehovah faithfully for some 70 years. Toward the
end of his life, during the reign of the Roman Emperor Domitian, John was exiled to the island of Patmos “for speaking about God and bearing witness to
Jesus.” There, in about 96 C.E., John received the visions that he recorded in the book of Revelation. (Rev.
1:1, 2, 9) Tradition has it that after his release, John
went to Ephesus, where he penned the Gospel that
bears his name and the letters known as 1, 2, and
3 John, and that he died in Ephesus in about 100 C.E.

Indeed, we are living at the time of the “restoration
of all things” referred to by Peter. In ful?llment of
the word “God spoke through the mouth of his holy
prophets of old time,” the Kingdom was established
in heaven in the year 1914. (Acts 3:21; Ps. 110:1-3;
Dan. 4:16, 17) Shortly thereafter, Christ began overseeing a spiritual restoration work on earth. As a result, millions have been brought into a spiritual paradise, becoming subjects of God’s Kingdom. They have
stripped o? the old, corrupted personality and “put on
the new personality which was created according to
God’s will.” (Eph. 4:22-24) As with the healing of the
8

58

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

crippled beggar, this astounding work has been accomplished, not by human e?orts, but by God’s spirit. Like
Peter, we must boldly and e?ectively use God’s Word
to teach others. Any success we may have in helping
people to become disciples of Christ is achieved by
God’s power, not our own.

“We Cannot Stop Speaking” (Acts 4:1-22)

Peter’s speech and the leaping, shouting, formerly
crippled man caused quite a commotion. In response,
the captain of the temple—appointed to oversee the
security of the temple area—and the chief priests
rushed to investigate. These men likely were Sadducees, a rich and politically powerful sect that worked
for peaceful relations with the Romans, rejected the
oral law so loved by the Pharisees, and derided belief
in the resurrection.1 How irked they were to discover Peter and John in the temple, boldly teaching that
Jesus had been resurrected!
9

The angry opposers threw Peter and John in jail
and dragged them before the Jewish high court the
10

1 See the box “The High Priest and the Chief Priests,” on page 60.

9-11. (a) How did the Jewish leaders react to Peter and John’s message?
(b) What did the apostles resolve to do?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

59

THE HIGH PRIEST
AND THE CHIEF PRIESTS

The high priest represented his people before God.
In the ?rst century C.E., he was also head of the
Sanhedrin. Surrounding him as leaders of the Jews
were the chief priests. They included former high
priests, such as Annas, and other adult males of the
families—perhaps as few as four or ?ve families—
from which high priests were selected. “The mere
fact of belonging to one of the privileged families,”
¨
wrote scholar Emil Schurer, “must have conferred a
particular distinction” among priests.
The Scriptures indicate that high priests served for
their lifetime. (Num. 35:25) During the period covered
by the book of Acts, however, Roman governors and
kings who ruled by the grace of Rome appointed and
deposed high priests at will. It does seem, though, that
these pagan rulers chose their appointees from the line
of priests descended from Aaron.

next day. From the viewpoint of the elitist rulers, Peter and John were “men unlettered and ordinary” who
had no right to teach in the temple. They had not
studied at any recognized religious school. Yet, their
outspokenness and their conviction caused the court
to wonder at them. Why were Peter and John so ef60

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

fective? One reason was that “they used to be with Jesus.” (Acts 4:13) Their Master had taught with real
authority, not like the scribes.—Matt. 7:28, 29.
The court ordered the apostles to stop preaching. In that society, the court’s orders carried much
weight. Just weeks earlier, this same body declared
Jesus “liable to death.” (Matt. 26:59-66) Still, Peter
and John were not intimidated. Standing in front of
these rich, well-educated, in?uential men, Peter and
John fearlessly but respectfully declared: “Whether it
is righteous in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves. But as for us,
we cannot stop speaking about the things we have
seen and heard.”—Acts 4:19, 20.
11

Are you able to show similar courage? How do
you feel when you have the opportunity to witness to
the rich, the well-educated, or the in?uential in your
community? What if family members, schoolmates,
or workmates ridicule you for your beliefs? Are you
intimidated? If so, you can overcome such feelings.
While on earth, Jesus taught the apostles how to defend their beliefs with con?dence and respect. (Matt.
12

12. What can help us to develop courage and conviction?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

61

10:11-18) After his resurrection, Jesus promised his
disciples that he would continue to be with them “all
the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
(Matt. 28:20) Under Jesus’ direction, “the faithful and
discreet slave” teaches us how to defend our beliefs.
(Matt. 24:45-47; 1 Pet. 3:15) This is done by instruction at congregation meetings, such as the Theocratic Ministry School, and through Bible-based publications, such as Reasoning From the Scriptures. Are
you making good use of these provisions? If you do
so, your courage and conviction will increase. And,
like the apostles, you will let nothing stop you from
speaking about the wonderful spiritual truths you
have seen and heard.
“They . . . Raised Their Voices to God” (Acts 4:23-31)
Immediately after being released from custody, Peter and John met with the rest of the congregation. Together, “they . . . raised their voices to God” and prayed
for courage to keep preaching. (Acts 4:24) Peter knew
only too well the folly of trusting in personal power
when attempting to do God’s will. Just weeks earlier,
he had self-con?dently told Jesus: “Although all the
13

13, 14. If we face opposition, what should we do, and why?
62

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

others are stumbled in connection with you, never will
I be stumbled!” Yet, as Jesus foretold, Peter quickly succumbed to fear of man and denied his friend
and teacher. However, Peter learned from his mistake.
—Matt. 26:33, 34, 69-75.
Determination alone will not sustain you as you
ful?ll your commission to be a witness of Christ. When
opposers try to break your faith or attempt to stop you
from preaching, follow the example of Peter and John.
Pray to Jehovah for strength. Seek the support of the
congregation. Tell the elders and other mature ones of
the di?culties you face. The prayers of others can be
a powerful sustaining force.—Eph. 6:18; Jas. 5:16.
14

If you once succumbed to pressure and stopped
preaching for a time, take heart. Remember, all the
apostles stopped preaching for a while after Jesus’
death but soon were active again. (Matt. 26:56; 28:10,
16-20) Rather than letting past mistakes weigh you
down, can you draw on the experience and use the lessons you learned to strengthen others?
15

16

What should we pray for when those in authority

15. Why can those who once stopped preaching for a time take heart?
16, 17. What can we learn from the prayer o?ered by Christ’s followers in Jerusalem?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

63

oppress us? Notice, please, that the disciples did not
ask that they be spared from facing trials. They well
remembered Jesus’ statement: “If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also.” (John 15:20) Instead, these loyal disciples asked Jehovah to “give attention to” the threats of the opposers. (Acts 4:29) The
disciples clearly saw the big picture, recognizing that
the persecution they faced was actually a ful?llment of
prophecy. They knew that, as Jesus had taught them to
pray, God’s will would ‘be done on earth,’ no matter
what mere human rulers may say.—Matt. 6:9, 10.
17

In order to do God’s will, the disciples prayed to

Jehovah: “Grant your slaves to keep speaking your
word with all boldness.” What was Jehovah’s immediate response? “The place in which they were gathered
together was shaken; and they were one and all ?lled
with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God
with boldness.” (Acts 4:29-31) Nothing can stop God’s
will from being accomplished. (Isa. 55:11) No matter
how great the odds, no matter how powerful the opponent, if we raise our voice to God in prayer, we can be
sure that He will grant us the strength to keep on
speaking His word with boldness.
64

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

18

Accountable, “Not to Men, But to God”
(Acts 4:32–5:11)
The ?edgling congregation in Jerusalem soon grew

to more than 5,000 members strong.1 Despite their diverse backgrounds, the disciples had “one heart and
soul.” They were united in the same mind and same
line of thought. (Acts 4:32; 1 Cor. 1:10) The disciples
did more than just pray to Jehovah to bless their efforts. They supported one another both spiritually
and, when necessary, materially. (1 John 3:16-18) For
example, the disciple Joseph, surnamed Barnabas by
the apostles, sold land he owned and unsel?shly donated the whole amount toward helping those from distant lands to stay in Jerusalem longer so that they
could learn more about their new faith.
19

A couple named Ananias and Sapphira also sold a

possession and made a contribution. They made a
pretense of giving the whole amount; however, they
1 There may have been only about 6,000 Pharisees and a smaller
number of Sadducees in Jerusalem in 33 C.E. This may indicate another reason why these two groups felt increasingly threatened by
the teachings of Jesus.

18. What did members of the congregation in Jerusalem do for one another?
19. Why did Jehovah execute Ananias and Sapphira?
“MEN UNLETTERED AND ORDINARY”

65

“secretly held back some of the price.” (Acts 5:2) Jehovah struck this couple dead, not because the amount
they gave was insu?cient, but because their motive
for giving was wicked and they were deceptive. They
“played false, not to men, but to God.” (Acts 5:4)
Like the hypocrites whom Jesus condemned, Ananias
and Sapphira were more concerned with seeking glory
from men than the approval of God.—Matt. 6:1-3.
20

With a generous spirit like that of faithful disciples

in ?rst-century Jerusalem, millions of present-day Witnesses support the worldwide preaching work by making voluntary donations. No one is forced to give either
his time or his money to support this work. Indeed, Jehovah does not want us to serve him grudgingly or under compulsion. (2 Cor. 9:7) When we do give, Jehovah is interested, not in the amount, but in the motive
for our giving. (Mark 12:41-44) Never would we want
to be like Ananias and Sapphira, allowing our service to God to be prompted by self-interest or gloryseeking. Instead, like Peter, John, and Barnabas, may
our service to Jehovah always be motivated by genuine
love of God and of our fellow man.—Matt. 22:37-40.
20. What lessons do we learn about giving to Jehovah?
66

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 5



“We Must Obey God as Ruler”
The apostles take a stand that sets a
precedent for all true Christians
Based on Acts 5:12–6:7

THE judges of the Sanhedrin are simmering with
rage! The apostles of Jesus are standing trial before
this high court. The reason? Joseph Caiaphas, the
high priest and president of the Sanhedrin, sternly addresses them: “We positively ordered you not to keep
teaching upon the basis of this name.” The angry
president cannot bring himself even to utter the name
of Jesus. “Yet,” Caiaphas continues, “you have ?lled
Jerusalem with your teaching, and you are determined to bring the blood of this man upon us.” (Acts
5:28) The message is clear: Stop preaching—or else!
2

How will the apostles respond? Their commission

to preach came from Jesus, whose authority was divinely bestowed. (Matt. 28:18-20) Will the apostles
1-3. (a) Why have the apostles been brought before the Sanhedrin, and
the issue boils down to what? (b) Why are we keenly interested in the
apostles’ stand?
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

67

cave in to fear of man and be silenced? Or will they
have the courage to stand ?rm and continue preaching? The issue really boils down to this: Will they
obey God or man? Without hesitation, the apostle Peter speaks for all the apostles. His words are unequivocal and bold.
As true Christians, we are keenly interested in
how the apostles responded to the threats of the Sanhedrin. The commission to preach applies to us as
well. In carrying out this God-given assignment, we
too may face opposition. (Matt. 10:22) Opposers may
try to restrict or ban our work. What will we do? We
can bene?t by considering the stand taken by the
apostles and the circumstances that led up to their
trial before the Sanhedrin.1
3

“Jehovah’s Angel Opened the Doors” (Acts 5:12-21a)
4 Recall that when ordered to stop preaching the
?rst time, Peter and John answered: “We cannot stop
speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”
(Acts 4:20) After that encounter with the Sanhedrin,
1 See the box “The Sanhedrin—High Court of the Jews,” on
page 69.

4, 5. Why did Caiaphas and the Sadducees become “?lled with jealousy”?
68

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

THE SANHEDRIN
—HIGH COURT OF THE JEWS

Although Judea was a province of the Roman
Empire, Rome permitted the Jews to observe their
own traditions and for the most part to govern
themselves. Minor crimes and civil cases were
handled by local courts, but questions that those
courts could not decide were referred to the Great
Sanhedrin in Jerusalem. This body functioned as the
supreme court of the Jewish people and as a national
administrative council. It also had the ?nal word on
the interpretation of Jewish law, and its authority was
respected by Jews everywhere.
The Sanhedrin met in its decision chamber, which
appears to have been located either in the temple
precincts or in its immediate vicinity. The council was
made up of 71 members—the high priest, who was the
president; other priestly nobles, including Sadducees;
lay aristocrats, and learned scribes. The decisions of
the court were ?nal.

Peter and John, along with the rest of the apostles,
continued preaching in the temple. The apostles performed great signs, such as healing the sick and expelling demons. They did so “in Solomon’s colonnade,” a covered portico on the east side of the
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

69

temple, where many Jews would gather. Why, even
Peter’s shadow apparently e?ected cures! Many who
were healed physically responded to words of spiritual healing. As a result, “believers in the Lord kept on
being added, multitudes both of men and of women.”
—Acts 5:12-15.
5

Caiaphas and the Sadducees, the religious sect to

which he belonged, became “?lled with jealousy” and
had the apostles thrown in jail. (Acts 5:17, 18) Why
were the Sadducees outraged? The apostles were
teaching that Jesus had been resurrected, yet the Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection. The apostles were saying that only by putting faith in Jesus
can one be saved, but the Sadducees feared reprisal
from Rome if the people looked to Jesus as their
Leader. (John 11:48) No wonder the Sadducees were
determined to silence the apostles!
6

Today, too, the principal instigators of persecu-

tion against Jehovah’s servants are religious opposers. Such ones often try to use their in?uence with
governmental authorities and the media to silence
6. Who today are the principal instigators of persecution against Jehovah’s servants, and why should this not surprise us?
70

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

our preaching. Should we be surprised? No. Our
message lays bare false religion. By accepting Bible
truths, honesthearted people are set free from unscriptural beliefs and practices. (John 8:32) Is it any
wonder, then, that our message often causes religious
leaders to become ?lled with jealous hatred?
7

Sitting in jail awaiting trial, the apostles may have

wondered whether they were about to su?er martyrdom at the hands of their enemies. (Matt. 24:9) But
during the night, something most unexpected happened—“Jehovah’s angel opened the doors of the
prison.”1 (Acts 5:19) The angel then gave them specific direction: Take “a stand in the temple,” and “keep
on speaking.” (Acts 5:20) That command no doubt assured the apostles that they had been doing the right
thing. The angel’s words may also have strengthened
them to remain ?rm no matter what happened. With
strong faith and courage, the apostles “entered into
1 This is the ?rst of some 20 speci?c references to angels in the
book of Acts. Earlier, at Acts 1:10, angels are indirectly referred to
as “men in white garments.”

7, 8. What e?ect did the angel’s command no doubt have on the apostles, and we do well to ask ourselves what question?
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

71

the temple at daybreak and began to teach.”—Acts
5:21.
8

Each of us does well to ask, ‘Would I have the

faith and courage needed to continue preaching under similar circumstances?’ We may draw strength
from knowing that the vital work of “bearing thorough witness concerning the kingdom of God” has
angelic backing and direction.—Acts 28:23; Rev. 14:
6, 7.
“We Must Obey God as Ruler Rather Than Men”
(Acts 5:21b-33)
9 Caiaphas and the other judges of the Sanhedrin
were now ready to deal with the apostles. Unaware of
what had happened at the jail, the court dispatched
o?cers to fetch the prisoners. Imagine the o?cers’
surprise when they discovered that the prisoners were
missing, although the jail was found “locked with all
security and the guards standing at the doors.” (Acts
5:23) The captain of the temple soon learned that the
apostles were back in the temple, bearing witness
about Jesus Christ—the very work for which they had
9-11. How did the apostles respond to the Sanhedrin’s demand that they
stop preaching, and how did this set a precedent for true Christians?
72

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

been thrown in jail! The captain and his o?cers
quickly went to the temple to gather up the prisoners and escort them to the Sanhedrin.
10

As described at the outset of this chapter, the fu-

rious religious leaders made it clear that the apostles
were to stop preaching. The apostles’ response? Serving as spokesman, Peter boldly replied: “We must
obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) The
apostles thereby set a precedent for true Christians
throughout the ages. Human rulers forfeit their right
to obedience in situations where they prohibit what
God requires or require what God prohibits. So in
our day, if “the superior authorities” ban our witnessing work, we cannot stop carrying out our God-given
assignment to preach the good news. (Rom. 13:1)
Rather, we will ?nd discreet ways to continue bearing thorough witness about God’s Kingdom.
Not surprisingly, the apostles’ bold response incited the exasperated judges to violent anger. They
11

were determined “to do away with” the apostles.
(Acts 5:33) Martyrdom now seemed certain for those
bold and zealous witnesses. Ah, but help was about
to come in a most unusual way!
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

73

“You Will Not B e Able to Overthrow Them”
(Acts 5:34-42)
12

Gamaliel, “a Law teacher esteemed by all the peo-

ple,” spoke up.1 This jurist must have been highly respected by his colleagues, for he took charge, even
giving “the command to put the [apostles] outside for
a little while.” (Acts 5:34) By citing past examples of
uprisings that quickly ?zzled after the leaders were
dead, Gamaliel urged the court to be patient and tolerant in dealing with the apostles, whose Leader, Jesus, had only recently died. Gamaliel’s reasoning was
persuasive: “Do not meddle with these men, but let
them alone; (because, if this scheme or this work is
from men, it will be overthrown; but if it is from
God, you will not be able to overthrow them;) otherwise, you may perhaps be found ?ghters actually
against God.” (Acts 5:38, 39) The judges heeded his
advice. Still, they had the apostles ?ogged and or1 See the box “Gamaliel—Esteemed Among the Rabbis,” on
page 75.

12, 13. (a) What advice did Gamaliel give his colleagues, and what did
they do? (b) How may Jehovah intervene in behalf of his people today,
and of what can we be sure if we are permitted to “su?er for the sake
of righteousness”?
74

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

GAMALIEL
—ESTEEMED AMONG THE RABBIS

The Gamaliel of Acts is generally identi?ed as
Gamaliel the Elder, the grandson of Hillel, who was
founder of the more liberal of the two schools of
Pharisaism. Gamaliel occupied a leading position in
the Sanhedrin and was so highly esteemed among the
rabbis that he was the ?rst to be given the honori?c
title “Rabban.” The Mishnah says: “When Rabban
Gamaliel the Elder died, the glory of the Law ceased
and purity and abstinence died.” He is credited
with various humane enactments. “Of particular
importance,” says the Encyclopaedia Judaica, “is his
decision permitting a woman to remarry on the
evidence of a single witness to the death of her
husband.” He is also said to have enacted laws
protecting wives against unprincipled husbands and
widows against unprincipled children and to have
argued that poor Gentiles should have the same
gleaning rights as poor Jews.

dered them “to stop speaking upon the basis of Jesus’ name.”—Acts 5:40.
13

Now, as then, Jehovah may raise up prominent

men like Gamaliel to intervene in behalf of His people. (Prov. 21:1) Jehovah can use his spirit to move
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

75

powerful rulers, judges, or lawmakers to act in harmony with his will. (Neh. 2:4-8) But if he should permit us to “su?er for the sake of righteousness,” we
can be sure of two things. (1 Pet. 3:14) First, God can
give us the strength to endure. (1 Cor. 10:13) Second,
opposers “will not be able to overthrow” God’s work.
—Isa. 54:17.
Did the ?ogging dampen the spirits of the apostles or weaken their resolve? By no means! They
“went their way from before the Sanhedrin, rejoicing.” (Acts 5:41) “Rejoicing”—why? Surely not because of the physical pain caused by the ?ogging.
They rejoiced because they knew that they had been
persecuted for keeping their integrity to Jehovah and
for following in the footsteps of their Exemplar, Jesus.—Matt. 5:11, 12.
14

Like our ?rst-century brothers, we endure with
joy when we su?er for the sake of the good news.
(1 Pet. 4:12-14) No, we do not enjoy being subjected
to threats, persecution, or imprisonment. But we ?nd
deep satisfaction in keeping our integrity. Consider,
15

14, 15. (a) How did the apostles respond to the ?ogging they received,
and why? (b) Relate an experience showing that Jehovah’s people endure
with joy.
76

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

for example, Henryk Dornik, who endured years of
harsh treatment under totalitarian regimes. He recalls
that in August 1944, the authorities decided to send
him and his brother to a concentration camp. The opposers said: “It is impossible to persuade them to do
anything. Their martyrdom brings them joy.” Brother Dornik explains: “Although I had no desire to be
a martyr, su?ering with courage and dignity for my
loyalty to Jehovah did bring me joy.”—Jas. 1:2-4.
16

The apostles wasted no time in resuming their

witnessing work. Undaunted, they continued “every
day in the temple and from house to house” the work
of “declaring the good news about the Christ.”1 (Acts
5:42) These zealous preachers were determined to
bear thorough witness. Notice that they took their
message to the homes of people, as Jesus Christ had
directed them. (Matt. 10:7, 11-14) No doubt, that is
how they had managed to ?ll Jerusalem with their
teaching. Today, Jehovah’s Witnesses are known for
following that apostolic method of preaching. By
1 See the box “Preaching ‘From House to House,’ ” on page 78.

16. How did the apostles show that they were determined to bear thorough witness, and how do we follow the apostolic method of preaching?
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

77

PREACHING “FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE”



Despite the Sanhedrin’s ban on their preaching
activity, the disciples continued preaching and
teaching “every day in the temple and from house to
house.” (Acts 5:42) Exactly what does “from house to
house” mean?
In the original Greek, the phrase kat oikon literally
means “according to house.” Several translators state
that the word ka·ta is to be understood in a
“distributive” sense, that is, the disciples’ preaching
was distributed from one house to another. A similar
use of ka·ta occurs at Luke 8:1, where Jesus is said
to have preached “from city to city and from village to
village.”
The plural form, kat oikous, is used at Acts 20:20.
The apostle Paul told Christian overseers: “I did not
hold back from . . . teaching you publicly and from
house to house.” That Paul here was not simply
talking about teaching in the elders’ homes, as some
suggest, is indicated in the next verse: “But I
thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks
about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord
Jesus.” (Acts 20:21) Fellow believers had already
repented and put faith in Jesus. So the preaching and
teaching from house to house clearly had to do with
bearing witness to unbelievers.
78

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

calling at each house in our territory, we clearly
demonstrate that we too want to be thorough, giving
everyone an opportunity to hear the good news. Has
Jehovah blessed our house-to-house ministry? Yes, he
has! Millions have responded to the Kingdom message in this time of the end, and many ?rst heard the
good news when a Witness knocked on their door.
Quali?ed Men to Care for “Necessary Business”
(Acts 6:1-6)
17 The young congregation now faced a subtle danger that threatened it from within. What was that?
Many of the disciples being baptized were visitors to
Jerusalem and wanted to learn more before returning
home. Disciples living in Jerusalem willingly donated
funds to meet the need for food and other supplies.
(Acts 2:44-46; 4:34-37) At this time, a delicate situation arose. “In the daily distribution” of food,
the Greek-speaking widows “were being overlooked.”
(Acts 6:1) The Hebrew-speaking widows, however,
were not being overlooked. The problem, then, apparently involved discrimination. Few issues have the potential to be more divisive than this one.
17-19. What divisive issue now arose, and what direction did the apostles give in order to resolve it?
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

79

18

The apostles, acting as the governing body of the

expanding congregation, recognized that it would not
be wise for them “to leave the word of God to distribute food.” (Acts 6:2) To resolve matters, they directed the disciples to search for seven men “full of
spirit and wisdom” whom the apostles could appoint
over this “necessary business.” (Acts 6:3) Quali?ed
men were needed because the work likely involved
not just serving food but also handling money, purchasing supplies, and keeping careful records. The
men chosen all had Greek names, which perhaps
made them more acceptable to the o?ended widows.
After giving prayerful consideration to the recommendation, the apostles appointed the seven men to
care for this “necessary business.”1
19

Did caring for the distribution of food mean that

the seven men appointed were now exempted from
the responsibility to preach the good news? De?nitely not! Among the men chosen was Stephen, who
would prove himself to be a bold and powerful
1 These men may have met the general quali?cations for elders, for
handling this “necessary business” was a weighty matter. However,
the Scriptures do not indicate precisely when men began to be appointed as elders or overseers in the Christian congregation.
80

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

witness-bearer. (Acts 6:8-10) Philip too was one of the
seven, and he is called “the evangelizer.” (Acts 21:8)
Evidently, then, the seven men continued to be zealous Kingdom preachers.
Jehovah’s people today follow the apostolic pattern. Men recommended for congregational responsibility must manifest godly wisdom and give evidence
that the holy spirit is operating on them. Under the
direction of the Governing Body, men who meet the
Scriptural requirements are appointed to serve as elders or ministerial servants in the congregations.1
(1 Tim. 3:1-9, 12, 13) Those who meet the quali?cations can be said to have been appointed by holy spirit. These hardworking men care for much “necessary
business.” For example, elders may coordinate practical help for faithful older ones who have a genuine
need. (Jas. 1:27) Some elders are very involved in
constructing Kingdom Halls, organizing conventions,
or doing hospital liaison work. Ministerial servants
care for many duties that do not directly involve
shepherding or teaching. All such quali?ed men must
20

1 Although the congregation recommended the seven certi?ed men,
the actual appointment was made by the apostles.

20. How do God’s people today follow the apostolic pattern?
“WE MUST OBEY GOD AS RULER”

81

balance congregational and organizational responsibilities with the God-assigned obligation to preach the
good news of the Kingdom.—1 Cor. 9:16.

21

“The Word of God Went On Growing”
(Acts 6:7)
With Jehovah’s backing, the ?edgling congrega-

tion survived persecution from without and a potentially divisive problem from within. Jehovah’s blessing was evident, for we are told: “The word of God
went on growing, and the number of the disciples
kept multiplying in Jerusalem very much; and a great
crowd of priests began to be obedient to the faith.”
(Acts 6:7) This is just one of a number of progress reports found in the book of Acts. (Acts 9:31; 12:24;
16:5; 19:20; 28:31) Today, are we not encouraged when
we hear reports about the progress of the Kingdompreaching work in other parts of the world?
22

Back in the ?rst century C.E., the infuriated reli-

gious leaders were not about to give up. A wave of
persecution was on the horizon. Soon, Stephen was
singled out for vicious opposition, as we will see in
the next chapter.
21, 22. What shows that Jehovah blessed the ?edgling congregation?
82

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

S E C T I O N 2 ? AC TS 6:8–9:43



“GREAT PERSECUTION
AROSE AGAINST THE
CONGREGATION”
ACTS 8:1
Did ?rst-century Christians allow mounting opposition to stop them from bearing witness about
God’s Kingdom? Quite the contrary. In this section, we will see that vicious persecution actually
resulted in the expansion of the preaching work.

CHAPTER 6



Stephen—“Full of
Graciousness and Power”
Learning from Stephen’s bold witness
before the Sanhedrin
Based on Acts 6:8–8:3

STEPHEN faces the court. In an imposing hall, likely near the temple in Jerusalem, 71 men are arranged
in a large semicircle. This court, the Sanhedrin, sits today to judge Stephen. The judges are powerful, in?uential men, most of whom have little regard for this
disciple of Jesus. In fact, the man who convened the
court is High Priest Caiaphas, who was presiding when
the Sanhedrin condemned Jesus Christ to death some
months earlier. Is Stephen frightened?
2

There is something remarkable about Stephen’s

countenance at this moment. The judges gaze at him
and see that his face is “as an angel’s face.” (Acts 6:15)
Angels bear messages from Jehovah God and thus
1-3. (a) Stephen faces what fearsome situation, yet how does he respond
to it? (b) What questions will we consider?
84

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

have reason to be fearless, serene, and peaceful. So it
is with Stephen—even those hate-?lled judges can see
that. How can he be so calm?
3

Christians today can learn much from the answer

to that question. We need to know, too, just what
brought Stephen to this climactic moment. How had
he defended his faith before? And in what ways can
we imitate him?
“They Stirred Up the People” (Acts 6:8-15)
4

We have already learned that Stephen was a pre-

cious asset to the ?edgling Christian congregation. In
the preceding chapter of this book, we saw that he was
among those seven humble men who were willing to
be of assistance to the apostles when called upon to
render aid. His humility is more remarkable when we
consider the gifts with which this man was blessed. At
Acts 6:8, we read that he was enabled to perform
“great portents and signs,” as some of the apostles did.
We are also told that he was “full of graciousness and
power.” What did that mean?
4, 5. (a) Why was Stephen a precious asset to the congregation? (b) In
what way was Stephen “full of graciousness and power”?
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

85

5

Stephen evidently had a kindly, gentle, winning

way with people. He spoke in such a manner as to persuade many of his hearers, convincing them of the sincerity of his heart and the wholesomeness of the
truths he discussed. He was full of power because Jehovah’s spirit was at work in him, for he humbly submitted to its lead. Rather than getting pu?ed up over
his own gifts and abilities, he directed all praise to
Jehovah and showed loving concern for the people
he addressed. Little wonder, then, that his opposers
found him a force to be reckoned with!
6

Various men rose up to dispute with Stephen, but

“they could not hold their own against the wisdom
and the spirit with which he was speaking.”1 Frustrated, they “secretly induced” men to bring accusations against this innocent follower of Christ. They
also “stirred up the people,” the older men, and the
1 Some of these opposers belonged to the “Synagogue of the Freedmen.” They may once have been captured by the Romans and later
freed, or perhaps they were freed slaves who had become Jewish
proselytes. Some were from Cilicia, as was Saul of Tarsus. The account does not reveal whether Saul was among those Cilicians who
were unable to hold their own against Stephen.

6-8. (a) Stephen’s opposers leveled what twofold charge against him, and
why? (b) Why may Stephen’s example prove useful to Christians today?
86

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

scribes, so that Stephen was forcibly taken before the
Sanhedrin. (Acts 6:9-12) The opposers leveled this
twofold charge against him: He was blaspheming both
God and Moses. In what ways?
7

The false accusers said that Stephen blasphemed

God in that he spoke against “this holy place”—the
temple in Jerusalem. (Acts 6:13) He blasphemed Moses, they charged, in that he spoke against the Mosaic Law, changing customs that Moses had handed
down. This was a very serious charge, for the Jews at
that time put great emphasis on the temple, the details of the Mosaic Law, and the many oral traditions
that they had added to that Law. Thus, the charge
meant that Stephen was a dangerous man, deserving
of death!
8

Sadly, it is not unusual for religious people to use

such tactics in order to bring trouble on servants of
God. To this day, religious opposers at times stir up
secular leaders to persecute Jehovah’s Witnesses. How
should we respond when faced with twisted or false accusations? We can learn much from Stephen.
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

87

9

B oldly Witnessing About “the God of Glory”
(Acts 7:1-53)
As mentioned at the outset, Stephen’s face was se-

rene, angelic, as he heard the charges against him.
Now Caiaphas turned to him and said: “Are these
things so?” (Acts 7:1) It was Stephen’s turn to speak.
And speak he did!
10

Some critics have attacked Stephen’s speech,

claiming that for all its length, it did not even answer
the charge against him. In truth, though, Stephen set
a sterling example for us of how to “make a defense”
of the good news. (1 Pet. 3:15) Keep in mind that Stephen was charged with blaspheming God by denigrating the temple and with blaspheming Moses by speaking against the Law. Stephen’s reply is a summary of
three phases of the history of Israel, with certain
points carefully emphasized. Let us consider these
three phases of history one at a time.
11

The era of the patriarchs. (Acts 7:1-16) Stephen be-

gan by talking about Abraham, whom the Jews re9, 10. Critics have made what claim about Stephen’s speech before the
Sanhedrin, and what do we need to keep in mind?
11, 12. (a) How did Stephen make e?ective use of Abraham’s example?
(b) Why was Joseph relevant to Stephen’s speech?
88

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

spected for his faith. While starting on this important
common ground, Stephen emphasized that Jehovah,
“the God of glory,” ?rst revealed himself to Abraham
in Mesopotamia. (Acts 7:2) In fact, that man was an
alien resident in the Promised Land. Abraham had neither a temple nor the Mosaic Law. How could anyone
insist that faithfulness to God must always depend on
such arrangements?
12

Abraham’s descendant Joseph was also highly es-

teemed by Stephen’s audience, but Stephen reminded
them that Joseph’s own brothers, the fathers of the
tribes of Israel, persecuted that righteous man and
sold him into slavery. Yet, he became God’s instrument for saving Israel from famine. Stephen no doubt
saw the clear similarities between Joseph and Jesus
Christ, but he held back that comparison in order to
keep his audience with him as long as possible.
13

The time of Moses. (Acts 7:17-43) Stephen said much

about Moses—wisely so, since many members of the
Sanhedrin were Sadducees, who rejected all Bible
books other than those written by Moses. Remember,
13. How did the discussion about Moses answer the charges against Stephen, and what theme did this help to develop?
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

89

IN WHAT SENSE A “MARTYR”?



The English word “martyr” is derived from the
Greek term martys, meaning “witness”—that is, one
who observes a deed or event. But the Greek word
means more than that. The Biblical martys is also
“active,” states one Greek lexicon, “called upon to tell
what he has seen and heard, to proclaim what he
knows.” All true Christians have the obligation to
bear witness to what they know about Jehovah and his
purposes. (Luke 24:48; Acts 1:8) The Scriptures call
Stephen a “witness” for speaking about Jesus.—Acts
22:20, Kingdom Interlinear.
Christian witnessing often means facing opposition,
arrest, beatings, and even death. Thus, from as early
as the second century C.E., “martyr” also came to
signify one who su?ers such consequences rather
than renounce his faith. It is in this sense that Stephen
may be called the ?rst Christian martyr. Originally,
though, a person was considered a “martyr” because
he witnessed, not because he died.

too, the charge that Stephen had blasphemed Moses.
Stephen’s words answered that charge directly, for he
showed that he had the greatest respect for Moses and
for the Law. (Acts 7:38) He noted that Moses too was
faced with rejection by those whom he endeavored to
90

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

save. They rejected him when he was 40 years old.
Over 40 years later, they challenged his leadership on
a number of occasions.1 Stephen thus steadily developed a key theme: God’s people repeatedly rejected
those whom Jehovah had appointed to lead them.
14

Stephen reminded his audience that Moses had

foretold that a prophet like Moses would arise from
Israel. Who would that be, and how would he be received? Stephen saved the answers for his conclusion.
He made another key point: Moses had learned that
any ground can be made holy, as in the case of the
ground at the burning bush, where Jehovah had spoken to him. So, can worship of Jehovah be limited or
con?ned to a single building, such as the temple in Jerusalem? Let us see.
15

The tabernacle and the temple. (Acts 7:44-50) Ste-

phen reminded the court that before there was any
1 Stephen’s speech contains information we can ?nd nowhere else
in the Bible, such as facts about Moses’ Egyptian education, his age
when he ?rst ?ed Egypt, and the length of his sojourn in Midian.

14. The use of Moses’ example supported what points in Stephen’s
speech?
15, 16. (a) Why was the tabernacle important to the argument Stephen
was developing? (b) How did Stephen use Solomon’s temple in his discussion?
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

91

temple in Jerusalem, God had Moses construct a tabernacle—a movable, tentlike structure for worship.
Who would dare to argue that the tabernacle was inferior to the temple, since Moses himself had worshipped there?
16

Later, when Solomon built the temple in Jerusa-

lem, he was inspired to convey a vital lesson in his
prayer. As Stephen put it, “the Most High does not
dwell in houses made with hands.” (Acts 7:48; 2 Chron.
6:18) Jehovah may make use of a temple to further his
purposes, but he is not con?ned to it. Why, then,
should his worshippers feel that pure worship depends on a building made by human hands? Stephen
brought this argument to a powerful conclusion by
quoting the book of Isaiah: “The heaven is my throne,
and the earth is my footstool. What sort of house will
you build for me? Jehovah says. Or what is the place
for my resting? My hand made all these things, did it
not?”—Acts 7:49, 50; Isa. 66:1, 2.
17

As you review Stephen’s speech to the Sanhedrin

17. How had Stephen’s speech (a) addressed the attitudes of his hearers and (b) responded to the charges against him?
92

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

up to this point, would you not agree that he skillfully addressed the attitudes of his accusers? He showed
that Jehovah’s purpose is progressive and dynamic,
not static and tradition-bound. Those who were mired
in reverence for that lovely building in Jerusalem and
for the customs and traditions that had grown up
around the Mosaic Law had missed the whole purpose
behind the Law and the temple! Indirectly, Stephen’s
speech raised the vital question: Do you not honor the
Law and the temple best by obeying Jehovah? Really,
Stephen’s words provided an excellent defense of his
own actions, for he had obeyed Jehovah as best he
could.
18

What can we learn from Stephen’s speech? He

was thoroughly familiar with the Scriptures. Likewise, we need to be serious students of God’s Word
if we are to handle “the word of the truth aright.”
(2 Tim. 2:15) We can also learn about graciousness
and tact from Stephen. His audience could hardly
have been more hostile! Yet, for as long as possible,
18. In what ways should we try to imitate Stephen?
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

93

he maintained common ground with them by dwelling on things that those men held in high regard. He
also addressed them with respect, calling the older
men “fathers.” (Acts 7:2) We too need to present the
truths of God’s Word with “a mild temper and deep
respect.”—1 Pet. 3:15.
19

However, we do not hold back from sharing the

truths of God’s Word for fear of o?ending people;
nor do we soften Jehovah’s judgment messages. Stephen is a case in point. He could no doubt see that
all the evidence that he had laid before the Sanhedrin had little e?ect on those hardhearted judges. So,
moved by holy spirit, he concluded his talk by fearlessly showing them that they were just like their
forefathers who had rejected Joseph, Moses, and all
the prophets. (Acts 7:51-53) In fact, these judges of
the Sanhedrin had murdered the Messiah, whose very
coming Moses and all the prophets had foretold.
Really, they had transgressed the Mosaic Law in the
worst possible way!
19. How did Stephen courageously deliver Jehovah’s judgment message
to the Sanhedrin?
94

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“Lord Jesus, Receive My Spirit” (Acts 7:54–8:3)
20 The undeniable truth of Stephen’s words ?lled
those judges with rage. Losing any semblance of dignity, they gnashed their teeth at Stephen. That faithful man must have seen that he would receive no mercy, any more than had his Master, Jesus.
21

Stephen needed courage to face what lay ahead,

and he no doubt received much encouragement from
the vision that Jehovah then kindly granted him. Stephen saw God’s glory, and he saw Jesus standing at
His Father’s right hand! As Stephen described the vision, his judges put their hands over their ears. Why?
Earlier, Jesus had told that same court that he was the
Messiah and that he would soon be at his Father’s
right hand. (Mark 14:62) Stephen’s vision proved that
Jesus spoke the truth. That Sanhedrin had, in fact, betrayed and murdered the Messiah! With one accord,
they rushed to have Stephen stoned to death.1
1 It is doubtful that the Sanhedrin had the authority under Roman
law to order an execution. (John 18:31) At any rate, Stephen’s death
seems to have been a murder carried out by an enraged mob, rather
than a judicial act.

20, 21. How did the Sanhedrin react to Stephen’s words, and how did
Jehovah strengthen him?
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

95

22

Stephen died in much the same way his Master

had died, with a heart at peace, full of trust in Jehovah and forgiveness for his killers. He said, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit,” perhaps because he could still
see in vision the Son of man with His Father. No
doubt, Stephen knew Jesus’ encouraging words: “I am
the resurrection and the life.” (John 11:25) Finally,
Stephen prayed directly to God in a loud voice: “Jehovah, do not charge this sin against them.” After saying
this, he fell asleep in death.—Acts 7:59, 60.
23

Stephen thus became the ?rst martyr on record

among Christ’s followers. (See the box “In What Sense
a ‘Martyr’? ” on page 90.) Sadly, though, he would
hardly be the last. Right down to our day, some faithful servants of Jehovah have been put to death by religious fanatics, political zealots, and other vicious opposers. Still, we have reason to be just as con?dent as
Stephen was. Jesus is reigning as King now, wielding
the marvelous power his Father has granted him.
Nothing will prevent him from resurrecting his faithful followers.—John 5:28, 29.
22, 23. Stephen’s death was like that of his Master in what ways, and
how can Christians today be as con?dent as Stephen was?
96

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

24

Observing all of this was a young man named

Saul. He approved of Stephen’s murder, even watching over the garments of those casting the stones.
Shortly thereafter, he spearheaded a wave of vicious
persecution. But the death of Stephen would cast a
long shadow. His example would only strengthen other Christians to remain faithful and achieve a similar
victory. Furthermore, Saul—in later years most often
called Paul—would come to look back on his role in
Stephen’s death with profound regret. (Acts 22:20) He
had helped to put Stephen to death, but he would later come to realize: “I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man.” (1 Tim. 1:13) Clearly, Paul
never forgot Stephen and the powerful speech he gave
that day. In fact, some of Paul’s speeches and writings
developed themes touched on in Stephen’s speech.
(Acts 7:48; 17:24; Heb. 9:24) In time, Paul fully learned
to follow the example of faith and courage set by Stephen, a man “full of graciousness and power.” The
question is, Will we?
24. How did Saul contribute to the martyrdom of Stephen, and what
were some long-term e?ects of that faithful man’s death?
STEPHEN—“FULL OF GRACIOUSNESS AND POWER”

97

CHAPTER 7



Declaring “the Good News
About Jesus”
Philip sets an example as an evangelizer
Based on Acts 8:4-40

A WAVE of bitter persecution has struck, and Saul begins to “deal outrageously” with the congregation—an
expression that in the original language describes brutal cruelty. (Acts 8:3) The disciples ?ee, and it may
seem to some that Saul’s goal of snu?ng out Christianity will be realized. However, something unexpected results from the dispersion of Christians. What
is it?
2

Those who are scattered begin “declaring the good

news of the word” in the lands to which they have ?ed.
(Acts 8:4) Just imagine! Not only has persecution
failed to silence the good news but it has actually
helped to spread the message! By scattering the disciples, the persecutors have unwittingly enabled the
1, 2. How did e?orts to silence the good news have the opposite e?ect in
the ?rst century?
98

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Kingdom-preaching work to expand into far-?ung territories. As we will see, something similar has happened in modern times.
3

“Those Who Had B een S cattered” (Acts 8:4-8)
One of “those who had been scattered” was Phil-

ip.1 (Acts 8:4; see the box “Philip ‘the Evangelizer,’ ”
on page 100.) He went to Samaria, a city that was
largely untouched by the preaching work, for Jesus
had at one time instructed the apostles: “Do not enter into a Samaritan city; but, instead, go continually to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” (Matt.
10:5, 6) However, Jesus knew that, in time, Samaria would receive a thorough witness, for prior to his
ascension to heaven, he said: “You will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant part of the earth.”
—Acts 1:8.
1 This is not the apostle Philip. Rather, it is the Philip who, as
noted in Chapter 5 of this book, was among the “seven certi?ed
men” appointed to organize the daily distribution of food among the
Greek-speaking and the Hebrew-speaking Christian widows in Jerusalem.—Acts 6:1-6.

3. (a) Who is Philip? (b) Why was Samaria largely untouched by the
preaching work, and yet what had Jesus foretold would happen to that
territory?
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

99

PHILIP “THE EVANGELIZER”



When Christ’s followers were scattered because of
persecution, Philip went to Samaria. Evidently, he
worked in close cooperation with the ?rst-century
governing body, for “when the apostles in Jerusalem
heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God,
they dispatched Peter and John to them.” The result
was that the new believers there received the free gift
of holy spirit.—Acts 8:14-17.
After the events recorded in Acts chapter 8, Philip is
mentioned just once more. Some 20 years after Philip’s
initial preaching, the apostle Paul and his traveling
companions were making their way to Jerusalem at
the end of Paul’s third missionary journey. The group
disembarked at Ptolemais. “The next day,” recounts
Luke, “we set out and arrived in Caesarea, and we
entered into the house of Philip the evangelizer, who
was one of the seven men, and we stayed with him. This
man had four daughters, virgins, that prophesied.”
—Acts 21:8, 9.
Apparently, Philip had settled in his preaching
territory and was a family man. The fact that Luke
refers to him as “the evangelizer” is signi?cant. The
Scriptures use this term to describe those who left
their homes to preach the good news in unworked
areas. Obviously, then, Philip’s zeal for the ministry
remained strong. And the fact that he had four
daughters who prophesied surely indicates that Philip
taught his family to love and serve Jehovah.
100

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

4

Philip found that Samaria was “white for harvest-

ing.” (John 4:35) His message was a breath of fresh air
to those living there, and it is easy to see why. The
Jews had no dealings with Samaritans, many even
showing disdain for them. In contrast, the Samaritans
found that the message of the good news ignored
class distinctions, and thus it di?ered greatly from the
narrow-minded thinking of the Pharisees. By zealously and impartially witnessing to the Samaritans, Philip
showed that he was not tainted by the prejudice of
those who looked down on them. It is hardly surprising, then, that crowds of Samaritans listened to Philip
“with one accord.”—Acts 8:6.
5 Today, as in the ?rst century, persecution of God’s
people has not silenced their preaching. Time and
again, forcing Christians to move from one place
to another—either prison or another land—has only
helped to introduce the Kingdom message to people in the new location. For instance, during World
War II, Jehovah’s Witnesses were able to give an
4. How do the Samaritans respond to Philip’s preaching, and what factor may have contributed to their reaction?
5-7. Give examples of how the dispersion of Christians has led to the
spread of the good news.
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

101

outstanding witness in Nazi concentration camps. A
Jew who encountered the Witnesses there relates:
“The fortitude of prisoners who were Jehovah’s Witnesses convinced me that their faith was based on the
Scriptures—and I became a Witness myself.”
6

In some cases, even persecutors received a witness

and responded to it. For example, when a Witness
named Franz Desch was transferred to the Gusen concentration camp in Austria, he was able to study the
Bible with an SS o?cer. Imagine their joy when years
later the two men were reunited at a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses and both were proclaimers of the
good news!
7

Something similar happened when persecution

caused Christians to ?ee from one country to another.
In the 1970’s, for example, a great witness was given in
Mozambique when Malawian Witnesses were forced
to ?ee there. Even when opposition later arose in Mozambique, the preaching work went on. “True, some of
us were apprehended and arrested a number of times
for our preaching activity,” says Francisco Coana.
“Yet, when many responded to the Kingdom message,
102

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

we were con?dent that God was helping us, just as he
helped ?rst-century Christians.”
8 Of course, persecution has not been the only reason for the growth of Christianity in foreign territories. In recent decades, political and economic changes have also opened up opportunities for the Kingdom
message to spread to people of many languages and
national groups. Some from war zones and economically depressed areas have ?ed to more stable places
and have begun to study the Bible in the land to which
they have relocated. An in?ux of refugees has caused
foreign-speaking territories to open up. In one city
—San Diego, California, U.S.A.—more than a hundred languages are spoken, and many foreign-language
congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses have been established there. Are you striving to witness to people “out
of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues” in
your territory?—Rev. 7:9.
“Give Me Also This Authority” (Acts 8:9-25)
9 Philip performed many signs in Samaria. For example, he healed those with disabilities and even cast
8. How have political and economic changes had an impact on the preaching work?
9. Who was Simon, and what evidently drew him to Philip?
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

103

out wicked spirits. (Acts 8:6-8) One man was particularly impressed with Philip’s miraculous gifts. He was
Simon, a magician who was so highly regarded that
people said of him: “This man is the Power of God.”
Simon was now an eyewitness to the real power of
God, as evidenced in the miracles performed by Philip, and Simon became a believer. (Acts 8:9-13) Later,
though, Simon’s motives were tested. How?
10 When the apostles became aware of the increase
that was taking place in Samaria, they sent Peter and
John there. (See the box “Peter Uses the ‘Keys of the
Kingdom,’ ” on page 105.) Upon arriving, the two
apostles laid their hands on the new disciples, whereupon each one received the holy spirit.1 When Simon
saw this, he was intrigued. “Give me also this authority,” he told the apostles, “that anyone upon whom I
1 Evidently, new disciples at that time were usually anointed by, or
received, holy spirit at their baptism. This put them in line for the
future hope of ruling as kings and priests with Jesus in heaven.
(2 Cor. 1:21, 22; Rev. 5:9, 10; 20:6) However, in this particular case,
the new disciples were not anointed at baptism. Receiving the holy
spirit—and the miraculous gifts that were associated with it—took
place only after Peter and John laid their hands on the newly baptized Christians.

10. (a) What did Peter and John do in Samaria? (b) What did Simon
do upon seeing that new disciples received the holy spirit when Peter and
John laid their hands on them?
104

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

PETER USES THE “KEYS OF THE KINGD OM”



Jesus told Peter: “I will give you the keys of the
kingdom of the heavens.” (Matt. 16:19) What did
Jesus mean? His reference to “keys” indicated that
Peter would open up knowledge and opportunities
for distinct groups to enter the Messianic Kingdom.
On what occasions did Peter use these keys?
? Peter used the ?rst key at Pentecost 33 C.E. when
he urged Jews and Jewish proselytes to repent and be
baptized. Some 3,000 did so and became prospective
heirs of the Kingdom.—Acts 2:1-41.
? The second key was used not long after the
martyrdom of Stephen. In this instance, Peter
and John laid their hands upon recently baptized
Samaritans, after which these new converts received
holy spirit.—Acts 8:14-17.
? Peter used the third key in 36 C.E. In that year,
he extended the hope of the heavenly inheritance
to uncircumcised Gentiles. This occurred when
the apostle gave a witness to Cornelius, the
?rst uncircumcised Gentile to become a Christian
disciple.—Acts 10:1-48.

lay my hands may receive holy spirit.” Simon even offered them money, hoping to buy this sacred privilege!
—Acts 8:14-19.
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

105

11

Peter’s reply to Simon was ?rm. “May your sil-

ver perish with you,” said the apostle, “because you
thought through money to get possession of the free
gift of God. You have neither part nor lot in this
matter, for your heart is not straight in the sight of
God.” Peter then urged Simon to repent and to pray
for forgiveness. “Supplicate Jehovah,” said Peter,
“that, if possible, the device of your heart [“this
scheme of yours,” New Jerusalem Bible] may be forgiven you.” Evidently, Simon was not a wicked man;
he wanted to do what was right, but he was momentarily misguided. So he pleaded with the apostles:
“You men, make supplication for me to Jehovah that
none of the things you have said may come upon
me.”—Acts 8:20-24.
12

The rebuke that Peter gave Simon stands as a

warning to Christians today. In fact, the English word
“simony” was coined as a result of this incident. “Simony” refers to the buying or selling of positions, spe11. What admonition does Peter give to Simon, and how does Simon respond?
12. What is “simony,” and how has it proved to be a snare in Christendom?
106

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ci?cally in a religious context. The history of apostate
Christendom is rife with examples of this practice. Indeed, the ninth edition of The Encyclopædia Britannica
(1878) noted: “A study of the history of the Papal conclaves leaves the student with the conviction that no
election untainted by simony has ever yet been made,
while in a great number of instances the simony practised in the conclave has been of the grossest, most
shameless, and most overt kind.”
13 Christians must guard against the sin of simony.
For instance, they should not try to gain favors by
showering generous gifts or excessive praise on those
who appear able to grant individuals added privileges
in the congregation. On the other hand, those who are
thought to be in a position to grant favors should be
on guard against showing favoritism toward wealthy
ones. Both situations involve simony. Really, all of
God’s servants should conduct themselves as ‘lesser
ones,’ waiting on Jehovah’s spirit to make appointments to privileges of service. (Luke 9:48) There is
no place in God’s organization for those who try to
“search out their own glory.”—Prov. 25:27.
13. In what ways must Christians be on guard against simony?
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

107

“Do You Actually Know What You Are Reading?”
(Acts 8:26-40)
14 Jehovah’s angel now instructed Philip to travel
along the road leading from Jerusalem to Gaza. Any
question in Philip’s mind as to why he should
go there was answered soon after he encountered
an Ethiopian eunuch who was “reading aloud the
prophet Isaiah.” (See the box “A ‘Eunuch’ in What
Sense?” on page 109.) Jehovah’s holy spirit moved
Philip to approach the man’s chariot. “Do you actually know what you are reading?” he asked the
Ethiopian while running beside the chariot. “How
could I ever do so,” the Ethiopian replied, “unless
someone guided me?”—Acts 8:26-31.
The Ethiopian invited Philip into the chariot. Just
imagine the discussion that followed! The identity of
the “sheep,” or “servant,” of Isaiah’s prophecy had
long been a mystery. (Isa. 53:1-12) Yet, as they traveled
on, Philip explained to the Ethiopian eunuch that this
prophecy was ful?lled in Jesus Christ. Like those who
were baptized at Pentecost 33 C.E., the Ethiopian
15

14, 15. (a) Who was the “Ethiopian eunuch,” and how did Philip locate
him? (b) How did the Ethiopian man respond to Philip’s message, and
why was his baptism not an impulsive act? (See footnote.)
108

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

A “EUNUCH” IN WHAT SENSE?



The Greek term eu·noukhos, rendered “eunuch,”
can refer either to a man deprived of his ability to
procreate or simply to a high-ranking court o?cial.
Court o?cials who oversaw the harem of a king
may actually have been castrated, but emasculation
was not a requirement for other o?cials, such
as a king’s cupbearer or treasury overseer. The
Ethiopian eunuch whom Philip baptized was
evidently that type of o?cial, for he oversaw a
royal treasury. In e?ect, he was a minister of
?nance.
The Ethiopian was also a proselyte—that is,
a non-Jew who had embraced the worship of
Jehovah. Indeed, he had just been to Jerusalem
to worship. (Acts 8:27) Because of this, we can
conclude that the Ethiopian could not have been
a eunuch in the literal sense, for the Mosaic Law
forbade castrated men from becoming part of the
congregation of Israel.—Deut. 23:1.

—who was already a Jewish proselyte—immediately
knew what he should do. “Look!” he said to Philip. “A
body of water; what prevents me from getting baptized?” The Ethiopian was baptized by Philip without
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

109

delay!1 (See the box “Baptism in ‘a Body of Water.’ ”)
Afterward, Philip was led to a new assignment in Ashdod, where he continued declaring the good news.
—Acts 8:32-40.
16 Christians today are privileged to share in work
like that done by Philip. Often, they are able to present
the Kingdom message to those they meet in informal
settings, such as when traveling. In many cases, it is apparent that their meeting up with an honesthearted individual is no coincidence. This is to be expected, for
the Bible makes clear that the angels are directing the
preaching work so that the message reaches “every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” (Rev. 14:6) Angelic direction in the preaching work is precisely what
Jesus foretold. In his illustration about the wheat and
weeds, Jesus said that during the harvesttime—the
conclusion of the system of things—“the reapers are
angels.” He added that these spirit creatures would
“collect out from his kingdom all things that cause
stumbling and persons who are doing lawlessness.”
1 This was not an impulsive act. Since he was a Jewish proselyte,
the Ethiopian already had a knowledge of the Scriptures, including
the Messianic prophecies. Now that he had information about Jesus’
role in God’s purpose, he could get baptized without delay.

16, 17. How are angels involved in the preaching work today?
110

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

BAPTISM IN “A B ODY OF WATER”



How is Christian baptism performed? Some believe
that it is su?cient to pour or sprinkle water on a
person’s head. However, the Ethiopian eunuch was
baptized in “a body of water.” The account says: “They
both went down into the water, both Philip and the
eunuch.” (Acts 8:36, 38) If pouring or sprinkling water
was all that was needed, it would not have been
necessary for the eunuch to halt his chariot at a body
of water. Even a minimal amount of water, such as
that contained in a skin bottle, would have been
enough. In fact, he probably had such a bottle because
he was traveling on “a desert road.”—Acts 8:26.
According to A Greek-English Lexicon, by Liddell
and Scott, the Greek word ba·ptizo—from which
the English “baptize” is derived—means “to dip, to
plunge.” Biblical references to baptism harmonize
with this de?nition. John 3:23 states that John “was
baptizing in Aenon near Salim, because there was a
great quantity of water there.” Likewise, the account of
Jesus’ baptism says: “On coming up out of the water
[Jesus] saw the heavens being parted.” (Mark 1:9, 10)
So true Christians are appropriately baptized by
complete immersion in water.

(Matt. 13:37-41) At the same time, the angels would
gather prospective heavenly heirs of the Kingdom
—and later “a great crowd” of “other sheep”—whom
DECLARING “THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT JESUS”

111

Jehovah wants to draw to his organization.—Rev. 7:9;
John 6:44, 65; 10:16.
17 As evidence that this is taking place, some of
those whom we approach in our ministry say that they
had been praying for spiritual guidance. Consider one
experience in which two Kingdom publishers were accompanied by a small child. At the end of the morning,
the two Witnesses were about to stop their preaching
work, but the child was unusually eager to go to the
next home. In fact, he went by himself and knocked on
the door! When a young lady opened the door, the two
adult Witnesses approached to talk to her. To their
surprise, the woman explained that she had just been
praying for someone to call on her to help her understand the Bible. A Bible study was arranged!
18 As a member of the Christian congregation, you
have the privilege of working along with the angels as
the modern-day preaching work takes place on an unprecedented scale. Never take that privilege for granted. By persevering in your e?orts, you will ?nd great
joy as you continue to declare “the good news about
Jesus.”—Acts 8:35.
18. Why should we never take our ministry for granted?
112

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 8



The Congregation “Entered Into
a Period of Peace”
The viciou s p erse cu t or
Saul becomes a zealous minister
Based on Acts 9:1-43

THE grim travelers are approaching Damascus, where
they intend to carry out an evil plan. They will tear the
hated disciples of Jesus from their homes, bind them,
humiliate them, and drag them to Jerusalem to face
the wrath of the Sanhedrin.
2 The mob leader, named Saul, already has blood on
his hands.1 Recently, he watched with approval as fellow zealots stoned to death Stephen, a devout disciple of Jesus. (Acts 7:57–8:1) Not content with raging
against the followers of Jesus who live in Jerusalem,
Saul becomes a firebrand ready to spread the flames
of persecution. He wants to eradicate the pestilent
sect known as “The Way.”—Acts 9:1, 2; see the box
“Saul’s Mandate in Damascus,” on page 114.
1 See the box “Saul the Pharisee,” on page 118.

1, 2. What did Saul intend to do in Damascus?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

113

SAUL’S MANDATE IN DAMAS CUS



How did Saul get authority to arrest Christians in
a foreign city? The Sanhedrin and the high priest
exercised moral authority over Jews everywhere, and
the high priest’s powers apparently included authority
to extradite criminals. Thus, letters from the high
priest would elicit the cooperation of the elders of the
Damascus synagogues.—Acts 9:1, 2.
The Romans, moreover, had granted the Jews
the right to manage their own judicial a?airs. This
explains how ?ve times the Jews could in?ict “forty
strokes less one” on the apostle Paul. (2 Cor. 11:24)
The book of 1 Maccabees also mentions a letter
written by a Roman consul to Ptolemy VIII of Egypt
in 138 B.C.E. that demanded: “If any pestilent men
have ?ed to you from their country [Judaea], hand
them over to Simon the high priest, that he may
punish them according to their law.” (1 Macc. 15:21)
In 47 B.C.E., Julius Caesar con?rmed the privileges
previously granted to the high priest along with his
right to settle any questions that arose over Jewish
customs.
3

Suddenly, a brilliant light engulfs Saul. His travel-

ing companions see the light but are speechless with
shock. Saul, struck blind, collapses. Unable to see,
3, 4. (a) What happened to Saul? (b) What questions will we consider?
114

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Saul hears a voice from heaven say: “Saul, Saul, why
are you persecuting me?” Stunned, Saul asks: “Who
are you, Lord?” The answer Saul receives must strike
him to the very core: “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.”—Acts 9:3-5; 22:9.
4

What can we learn from Jesus’ initial words to

Saul? How can we bene?t from reviewing the events
surrounding the conversion of Saul? And what lessons
can we draw from the way the congregation used the
period of peace that settled in after Saul’s conversion?
5

“Why Are You Persecuting Me?” (Acts 9:1-5)
When Jesus stopped Saul on the road to Damas-

cus, He did not ask: “Why are you persecuting my disciples?” As noted above, he said: “Why are you persecuting me?” (Acts 9:4) Yes, Jesus personally feels
the trials experienced by his followers.—Matt. 25:3440, 45.
6

If you are being oppressed because of your faith in

Christ, be assured that both Jehovah and Jesus are
aware of your situation. (Matt. 10:22, 28-31) At present, the trial may not be removed. Remember, Jesus
5, 6. What can we learn from Jesus’ words to Saul?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

115

watched Saul’s involvement in Stephen’s death, and
He saw Saul drag faithful disciples from their homes
in Jerusalem. (Acts 8:3) Yet, Jesus did not intervene at
that time. Even so, Jehovah, through Christ, gave Stephen and the other disciples the strength they needed
to remain faithful.
7

You too can endure persecution if you do the fol-

lowing: (1) Resolve to remain loyal, come what may.
(2) Ask for Jehovah’s help. (Phil. 4:6, 7) (3) Leave vengeance in Jehovah’s hands. (Rom. 12:17-21) (4) Trust
that Jehovah will provide you with the strength to endure until he sees ?t to remove the trial.—Phil. 4:
12, 13.
“S aul, Brother, the Lord . . . Has
S ent Me Forth” (Acts 9:6-17)
8

After answering Saul’s question, “Who are you,

Lord?” Jesus said to him: “Rise and enter into the
city, and what you must do will be told you.” (Acts
9:6) The sightless Saul was led to his lodgings in Damascus, where he fasted and prayed for three days.
7. What must you do in order to endure persecution?
8, 9. How might Ananias have felt about his assignment?
116

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Meanwhile, Jesus spoke about Saul to a disciple in
that city, a man named Ananias, who was “well reported on by all the Jews” dwelling in Damascus.
—Acts 22:12.
9

Think of the mixed emotions Ananias must have

felt! Here, the Head of the congregation, the resurrected Jesus Christ, was speaking to him personally,
singling him out for a special assignment. What an
honor, but what an assignment! When told that he
must speak to Saul, Ananias responded: “Lord, I have
heard from many about this man, how many injurious things he did to your holy ones in Jerusalem.
And here he has authority from the chief priests to
put in bonds all those calling upon your name.”
—Acts 9:13, 14.
10

Jesus did not reprove Ananias for expressing his

concern. However, Jesus did provide him with clear direction. And He digni?ed him by telling him the reason why He wanted him to perform this unusual task.
Jesus said of Saul: “This man is a chosen vessel to me
to bear my name to the nations as well as to kings and
10. What do we learn about Jesus from the way he dealt with Ananias?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

117

SAUL THE PHARISEE



The “young man called Saul” who appears in the
Acts account at the stoning of Stephen was from
Tarsus. It was the capital of the Roman province of
Cilicia, in the south of modern-day Turkey. (Acts 7:
58) A sizable Jewish community dwelled in that city.
According to his own writings, Saul was “circumcised
the eighth day, out of the family stock of Israel, of the
tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born from Hebrews; as
respects law, a Pharisee.” That was viewed as an
impeccable Jewish pedigree!—Phil. 3:5.
Saul’s home was in a large, prosperous trading city,
a center of Greek culture. Growing up in Tarsus, Saul
knew Greek. It is likely that he would have received
his primary education in a Jewish school. Saul learned
to be a tentmaker, a skill typical of his native area. In
all probability, while still a youth, Saul acquired this
trade from his father.—Acts 18:2, 3.
The Acts account also reveals that Saul was born a
Roman citizen. (Acts 22:25-28) This means that one
of his forebears had already acquired that distinction.
How Saul’s family obtained Roman citizenship is
unknown. Whatever the case, that privilege would
place them among the social elite of their province.
Saul’s background and education, then, gave him
a ?rm foothold in three di?erent cultures—Jewish,
Greek, and Roman.
118

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Likely, when he was no older than 13, Saul moved
520 miles to Jerusalem to continue his education. In
that city, Saul studied at the feet of Gamaliel, a highly
esteemed teacher in the Pharisaic tradition.—Acts
22:3.
These additional studies, comparable to going to a
university today, would consist of instruction in
and memorization of both Scripture and Jewish oral
law. A successful student of Gamaliel would have a
promising career before him, and apparently Saul was
just such a student. He later wrote: “I was making
greater progress in Judaism than many of my own age
in my race, as I was far more zealous for the traditions
of my fathers.” (Gal. 1:14) Of course, Saul’s zeal for
Jewish tradition was what turned him into a notorious
persecutor of the ?edgling Christian congregation.

the sons of Israel. For I shall show him plainly how
many things he must su?er for my name.” (Acts 9:15,
16) Ananias promptly obeyed Jesus. He sought out the
persecutor Saul and said to him: “Saul, brother, the
Lord, the Jesus that appeared to you on the road over
which you were coming, has sent me forth, in order
that you may recover sight and be ?lled with holy spirit.”—Acts 9:17.
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

119

11

Several facts become evident from the events in-

volving Jesus, Ananias, and Saul. For example, Jesus
plays an active role in directing the preaching work,
just as he promised he would. (Matt. 28:20) Although
he does not speak directly to individuals today, Jesus
does direct the preaching work by means of the faithful slave, whom he has now appointed over his domestics. (Matt. 24:45-47) Under the Governing Body’s
direction, publishers, pioneers, and missionaries are
sent out to ?nd those who want to know more about
Christ. As mentioned in the preceding chapter, many
of such ones have prayed for guidance and have then
been contacted by Jehovah’s Witnesses.—Acts 9:11.
12

Ananias obediently accepted an assignment and

was blessed. Do you obey the command to bear thorough witness, even if the assignment causes you some
apprehension? For some, going from house to house
and meeting strangers can cause anxiety. Others ?nd it
a challenge to preach to people at their places of business, on the street, or via telephone. Ananias over11, 12. What do we learn from the events involving Jesus, Ananias, and
Saul?
120

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

came his fear and had the honor of helping Saul receive the holy spirit.1 Ananias was successful because
he trusted Jesus and he viewed Saul as his brother. We
can overcome our fears if, like Ananias, we trust that
Jesus is directing the preaching work, we have empathy for people, and we view even the most intimidating
individuals as our potential brothers.—Matt. 9:36.
“He B egan to Preach Jesus” (Acts 9:18-30)
13

Saul acted swiftly on what he learned. After he

was healed, he submitted to baptism and began associating closely with the disciples in Damascus. But he
did more. “Immediately in the synagogues he began to
preach Jesus, that this One is the Son of God.”—Acts
9:20.
14

If you are studying the Bible but are not yet

1 As a general rule, the gifts of the holy spirit were passed on
through the apostles. In this unusual situation, however, it appears
that Jesus authorized Ananias to transmit the gifts of the spirit to
His “chosen vessel,” Saul. After his conversion, Saul was separated
for a considerable time from contact with the 12 apostles. However,
it is likely that he was active throughout that period. So Jesus apparently saw to it that Saul had the power he needed in order to
carry out his preaching assignment.

13, 14. If you are studying the Bible but are not yet baptized, what can
you learn from Saul’s example?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

121

baptized, will you be like Saul and act decisively on
what you learn? Granted, Saul witnessed ?rsthand
a miracle performed by Christ, and this no doubt
helped to motivate him to action. But others also witnessed miracles performed by Jesus. For instance, one
group of Pharisees watched as he cured a man’s withered hand, and a large number of the Jews in general
knew that Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead. Yet,
many of them remained apathetic, even antagonistic.
(Mark 3:1-6; John 12:9, 10) By contrast, Saul was transformed. Why did Saul respond when others failed to
do so? Because he feared God more than man and he
deeply appreciated the mercy Christ had shown to
him. (Phil. 3:8) If you respond similarly, you will let
nothing stop you from joining in the preaching work
and from becoming quali?ed for baptism.
15

Can you picture the surprise, shock, and anger

that must have rippled through the crowds when Saul
began to preach about Jesus in the synagogues? “Is
this not the man that ravaged those in Jerusalem who
call upon this name?” they asked. (Acts 9:21) When ex15, 16. What did Saul do in the synagogues, and how did the Jews in
Damascus respond?
122

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

plaining his change of heart about Jesus, Saul “proved
logically that this is the Christ.” (Acts 9:22) But logic
is not a universal key. It cannot unlock every mind
shackled by tradition or every heart bound by pride.
Still, Saul did not give up.
16

Three years later, the Jews in Damascus were still

contending with Saul. Finally, they sought to kill him.
(Acts 9:23; 2 Cor. 11:32, 33; Gal. 1:13-18) When the
plot became known, Saul chose the discreet course
and left the city by allowing himself to be lowered in a
basket through an opening in the city wall. Luke describes those who helped Saul escape that night as being “his [Saul’s] disciples.” (Acts 9:25) This wording
seems to indicate that at least some who heard Saul
speak in Damascus responded to his preaching and became followers of Christ.
17

When you ?rst started to tell your family, friends,

and others about the good things you were learning,
you may have expected that everyone would accept the
sheer logic of Bible truth. Some may have done so,
17. (a) In what ways do people respond to Bible truth? (b) What should
we continue to do, and why?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

123

whereas many did not. Indeed, members of your own
household may have treated you as an enemy. (Matt.
10:32-38) However, if you continue to improve in your
ability to reason from the Scriptures and if you maintain Christian conduct, even those who oppose you
might eventually have a change of heart.—Acts 17:2;
1 Pet. 2:12; 3:1, 2, 7.
18

When Saul entered Jerusalem, the disciples were

understandably skeptical of his claims that he was
now a disciple. However, when Barnabas vouched for
Saul, the apostles accepted him, and he remained with
them for a time. (Acts 9:26-28) Saul was discreet, but
he was not ashamed of the good news. (Rom. 1:16) He
boldly preached in Jerusalem, the very place from
which he had launched vicious persecution against the
disciples of Jesus Christ. To their horror, the Jews in
Jerusalem realized that their champion had defected,
and they now sought to kill him. “When the brothers
detected this,” states the account, “they brought [Saul]
down to Caesarea and sent him o? to Tarsus.” (Acts 9:
30) Saul submitted to Jesus’ direction as expressed
18, 19. (a) When Barnabas vouched for Saul, what was the e?ect?
(b) How can we imitate Barnabas and Saul?
124

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

through the congregation. Both Saul and the congregation bene?ted.
19

Notice that Barnabas took the initiative to assist

Saul. No doubt this kind act helped to foster the warm
friendship that developed between these zealous servants of Jehovah. Do you, like Barnabas, willingly assist new ones in the congregation, working with them
in the ?eld service and helping them to progress spiritually? You will be richly rewarded if you do. If you
are a new publisher of the good news, do you, like
Saul, accept the help that is o?ered to you? By working along with more experienced publishers, you will
improve in your skill in the ministry, your joy will increase, and you will form bonds of friendship that can
last a lifetime.
20

“Many B ecame B elievers” (Acts 9:31-43)
After Saul’s conversion and safe departure, “the

congregation throughout the whole of Judea and Galilee and Samaria entered into a period of peace.” (Acts
9:31) How did the disciples use this “favorable season”? (2 Tim. 4:2) The account says that they were
20, 21. How have God’s servants past and present made the most of ‘periods of peace’?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

125

“being built up.” The apostles and other responsible
brothers reinforced the faith of the disciples and took
the lead as the congregation “walked in the fear of Jehovah and in the comfort of the holy spirit.” For example, Peter used the time to strengthen the disciples
in the town of Lydda in the Plain of Sharon. His e?orts
caused many who lived in the vicinity to turn “to the
Lord.” (Acts 9:32-35) The disciples did not become
sidetracked by other pursuits but exerted themselves
caring for one another and preaching the good news.
The result was that the congregation “kept on multiplying.”
21

Toward the end of the 20th century, Jehovah’s

Witnesses in many countries entered into a similar
“period of peace.” Regimes that had oppressed God’s
people for decades suddenly came to an end, and certain bans on the preaching work were eased or lifted.
Tens of thousands of Witnesses seized the opportunity to preach publicly, with spectacular results.
For instance, when Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia received o?cial recognition in 1991, there were fewer
than 16,000 Kingdom publishers in that country. Just
126

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

16 years later, in 2007, more than 150,000 were zealously preaching the good news.
22

Are you making good use of the freedom you pos-

sess? If you live in a country that enjoys religious freedom, Satan would love to induce you to pursue material riches, not Kingdom interests. (Matt. 13:22) Do not
be sidetracked. Use productively any periods of relative peace that you may now enjoy. View them as opportunities to bear thorough witness and to build up
the congregation. Remember, your circumstances can
change abruptly.
23

Consider what happened to a disciple named Tab-

itha, or Dorcas. She lived in Joppa, a town not far
from Lydda. This faithful sister used her time and assets wisely, abounding “in good deeds and gifts of mercy.” Suddenly, though, she fell ill and died.1 Her death
caused great grief among the disciples in Joppa, especially among the widows who had been touched by her
kindness. When Peter arrived at the house where her
1 See the box “Dorcas—‘She Abounded in Good Deeds,’ ” on
page 128.

22. How can you make the most of the freedom that you possess?
23, 24. (a) What points do we learn from the account involving Tabitha?
(b) What should be our resolve?
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

127

D ORCAS —“SHE AB OUNDED IN G O OD DEEDS”



Dorcas was a member of the Christian congregation
in the seaport town of Joppa. Her fellow believers loved
her because “she abounded in good deeds and gifts of
mercy.” (Acts 9:36) Like many Jews who lived in areas
having a mixed Jewish and Gentile population, Dorcas
had two names—one Hebrew or Aramaic and the other
Greek or Latin. Her Greek name, Dorcas, was rendered
“Tabitha” in Aramaic. Both names mean “Gazelle.”
It appears that Dorcas fell sick and suddenly died. As
was the custom, her body was washed in preparation
for burial. It was laid out in an upper chamber, possibly
in her own house. The hot climate of the Middle East
required that burials take place either on the day of a
person’s death or on the next day. The Christians in
Joppa had heard that the apostle Peter was in nearby
Lydda. There was enough time for Peter to come to
Joppa before Dorcas would have to be buried, since
the distance between the two cities was only 11 miles
—about a four-hour walk. So the congregation
dispatched two men to ask Peter to come without
delay. (Acts 9:37, 38) Says one scholar: “It was a regular
practice in early Judaism to send out emissaries in pairs,
in part so that one could validate the testimony of the
other.”
What happened when Peter arrived? The account tells
us: “They led him up into the upper chamber; and all
the widows presented themselves to him weeping and
128

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

exhibiting many inner garments and outer garments
that Dorcas used to make while she was with them.”
(Acts 9:39) Among the factors that endeared Dorcas to
the members of her congregation was that she was in the
habit of sewing for them. She made tunics, worn next to
the body, and cloaks or robes, which were worn over the
tunic. Whether Dorcas paid for all the material herself
or just provided her labor is not stated. In any case, she
was loved for her kindness and “gifts of mercy.”
What Peter saw in that upper chamber must have
moved him. “This was mourning which was far di?erent
from that manifested in the house of Jairus with
its noisy, hired mourning women and ?uteblowers,” says
scholar Richard Lenski. “This was not such arti?cial
mourning as that.” (Matt. 9:23) It was genuine and
heartfelt. The fact that no mention is ever made of a
husband leads many to conclude that Dorcas was single.
When Jesus commissioned his apostles, he gave them
power to “raise up dead persons.” (Matt. 10:8) Peter
had seen Jesus perform such miracles, including the
resurrection of Jairus’ daughter, but we have no record
prior to this of an apostle performing a resurrection.
(Mark 5:21-24, 35-43) But now Peter put onlookers out
of the upper chamber, and then he prayed earnestly,
with the result that Tabitha opened her eyes and sat
up. What joy there must have been among the Christians
in Joppa when Peter was then able to present to the
holy ones and the widows their beloved Dorcas—alive!
—Acts 9:40-42.
THE CONGREGATION “ENTERED INTO A PERIOD OF PEACE”

129

body was being prepared for burial, he performed a
miracle unprecedented among the apostles of Jesus
Christ. Peter prayed and then raised Tabitha from the
dead! Can you imagine the joy of the widows and other disciples when Peter called them back into the
room and presented Tabitha to them alive? How these
events must have strengthened them for the trials
that lay ahead! Understandably, the miracle “became
known throughout all Joppa, and many became believers on the Lord.”—Acts 9:36-42.
24

We learn two important points from this heart-

warming account involving Tabitha. (1) Life is ?eeting.
How vital it is, then, that we make a good name with
God while we are able to do so! (Eccl. 7:1) (2) The resurrection hope is sure. Jehovah noticed the numerous
acts of kindness that Tabitha had performed, and he
rewarded her. He will remember our hard work and
will resurrect us if our life should end before Armageddon. (Heb. 6:10) So whether we are currently enduring a “troublesome season” or are enjoying “a period of peace,” let us persevere in bearing thorough
witness to Christ.—2 Tim. 4:2.
130

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

S E C T I O N 3 ? AC TS 10:1–12:25



“PEOPLE OF THE NATIONS
. . . RECEIVED THE
WORD OF GOD”
ACTS 11:1
Would the Jewish followers of Jesus be willing to
preach the good news to uncircumcised Gentiles?
In this section, we will see how Jehovah’s spirit
opened hearts and enabled Christians to overcome prejudice, giving great impetus to the work
of bearing witness to all the nations.

CHAPTER 9



“God Is Not Partial”
The preaching work opens up
to uncircumcised Gentiles
Based on Acts 10:1–11:30

THE year is 36 C.E. The autumn sun warms Peter as
he prays on the ?at rooftop of a house near the sea in
the harbor city of Joppa. He has been a guest in this
home for some days now. His willingness to stay here
reveals, to an extent, an unprejudiced attitude. The
owner, a certain Simon, is a tanner by trade, and not
every Jew would lodge with such a man.1 Still, Peter is
about to learn a vital lesson regarding Jehovah’s impartiality.
2 While Peter is praying, he falls into a trance. What
he sees in a vision would disturb any Jew. Descending
1 Some Jews looked down on a tanner because his trade brought
him into contact with the hides and carcasses of animals and with
the loathsome materials required for his work. Tanners were considered un?t to appear at the temple, and their place of business had
to be no less than 50 cubits, or somewhat over 70 feet, from a town.
This, in part, may explain why Simon’s house was “by the sea.”—Acts
10:6.

1-3. What vision does Peter receive, and why do we need to grasp its signi?cance?
132

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

from heaven is a sheetlike vessel containing animals
unclean according to the Law. Told to slaughter and
eat, Peter replies: “Never have I eaten anything de?led
and unclean.” Not once but three times he is told:
“You stop calling de?led the things God has cleansed.”
(Acts 10:14-16) The vision leaves Peter confused but
not for long.
3 What did Peter’s vision mean? It is important that
we grasp its signi?cance, for at the heart of this vision
is a profound truth about the way Jehovah views people. As true Christians, we cannot bear thorough witness about God’s Kingdom unless we learn to share
God’s view of people. To unlock the meaning of Peter’s vision, let us examine the dramatic events that
surrounded it.

4

Making “Supplication to God Continually”
(Acts 10:1-8)
Little did Peter know that the preceding day in

Caesarea, about 30 miles north, a man named Cornelius had also received a divine vision. Cornelius, a centurion in the Roman army, was “a devout man.”1
1 See the box “Cornelius and the Roman Army,” on page 134.

4, 5. Who was Cornelius, and what happened while he was praying?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

133

CORNELIUS AND THE ROMAN ARMY



Administrative and military headquarters for the
Roman province of Judea were located in Caesarea.
The troops under the governor’s command consisted
of 500 to 1,000 cavalry and ?ve cohorts of infantry,
the size of which could be varied from 500 to 1,000
soldiers each. These troops were usually recruited
from among provincials rather than Roman citizens.
Most served in Caesarea, but small garrisons were
scattered throughout Judea. One cohort was permanently based in the Tower of Antonia in Jerusalem in
order to police the Temple Mount and the city. The
Roman presence in that city would be reinforced during Jewish festivals to deal with possible disturbances.
A cohort was divided into six centuries, nominally of 100 men, each commanded by a centurion. The
Greek text of Acts 10:1 says that Cornelius was a centurion of the so-called Italian Band, probably based
in Caesarea. This unit may have been the Second
Italian Cohort of Roman Citizen Volunteers.1 Centurions had considerable social and military status, as
well as wealth. Their pay was perhaps 16 times that
of regular soldiers.
1 In Latin, Cohors II Italica voluntariorum civium Romanorum. Its
presence in Syria in 69 C.E. is attested.
134

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

He was also an exemplary family man, for he was “one
fearing God together with all his household.” Cornelius was not a Jewish proselyte; he was an uncircumcised Gentile. Yet, he showed compassion to needy
Jews, giving them material help. This sincere man
“made supplication to God continually.”—Acts 10:2.
5

At about 3:00 p.m., Cornelius was praying when he

saw a vision in which an angel told him: “Your prayers
and gifts of mercy have ascended as a remembrance
before God.” (Acts 10:4) As directed by the angel, Cornelius dispatched men to summon the apostle Peter.
As an uncircumcised Gentile, Cornelius was about to
enter a door that up to then had been closed to him.
He was about to receive the message of salvation.
6

Does God answer the prayers of sincere ones today

who want to ?nd out the truth about him? Consider an
experience. A woman in Albania accepted a copy of
The Watchtower containing an article about raising
children.1 She told the Witness who called at her door:
1 The article, entitled “Reliable Advice for Raising Children,” appeared in the November 1, 2006, issue, pages 4 to 7.

6, 7. (a) Relate an experience showing that God answers the prayers of
sincere ones who want to ?nd out the truth about him. (b) What can we
conclude from such experiences?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

135

“Would you believe that I was praying to God for help
in raising my daughters? He sent you! You touched my
heart in the exact spot where I needed it!” The woman
and her daughters began studying, and her husband
later joined in the study.
7

Is this an isolated example? By no means! This type

of experience has been repeated over and over again
around the world—far too often to be attributed to
mere chance. What, then, can we conclude? First, Jehovah answers the prayers of sincere individuals who
search for him. (1 Ki. 8:41-43; Ps. 65:2) Second, we
have angelic support for our preaching work.—Rev.
14:6, 7.
“Peter Was in Great Perplexity” (Acts 10:9-23a)
8

Still on the rooftop, “Peter was in great perplexity”

over the meaning of the vision when messengers from
Cornelius approached the house. (Acts 10:17) Would
Peter, who had three times said that he would refuse to eat foods considered unclean according to
the Law, be willing to go with these men and enter
into the home of a Gentile? In some way holy spirit
8, 9. What did the spirit make known to Peter, and how did he respond?
136

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

made God’s will known in this matter. Peter was told:
“Look! Three men are seeking you. However, rise, go
downstairs and be on your way with them, not doubting at all, because I have dispatched them.” (Acts 10:
19, 20) The vision of the sheetlike vessel that Peter had
received no doubt prepared him to yield to the leadings of the holy spirit.
9

Learning that Cornelius had been divinely in-

structed to send for him, Peter invited the Gentile
messengers into the house “and entertained them.”
(Acts 10:23a) The obedient apostle was already adjusting to new developments in the outworking of God’s
will.
10

To this day, Jehovah leads his people progressive-

ly. (Prov. 4:18) By means of his holy spirit, he is guiding “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) At
times, we may receive clari?cations in our understanding of God’s Word or changes in certain organizational procedures. We do well to ask ourselves: ‘How do I
respond to such re?nements? Do I submit to the leadings of God’s spirit in these matters?’
10. How does Jehovah lead his people, and what questions may we need
to ask ourselves?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

137

Peter “Commanded Them to B e Baptized”
(Acts 10:23b-48)
11 The day after his vision, Peter and nine others—the
three messengers sent by Cornelius and “six [Jewish]
brothers” from Joppa—headed up to Caesarea. (Acts
11:12) Expecting Peter, Cornelius had assembled “his
relatives and intimate friends”—evidently all Gentiles.
(Acts 10:24) Upon arriving, Peter did something once
unthinkable for him: He entered the home of an uncircumcised Gentile! Peter explained: “You well know
how unlawful it is for a Jew to join himself to or approach a man of another race; and yet God has shown
me I should call no man de?led or unclean.” (Acts 10:
28) By now Peter had come to discern that the vision
he had received was intended to teach a lesson that was
not limited to the types of foods one should eat. He
should “call no man [not even a Gentile] de?led.”
12 A receptive audience awaited Peter. “We are all
present before God to hear all the things you have
been commanded by Jehovah to say,” explained Cornelius. (Acts 10:33) Imagine how you would feel if you
heard such words from an interested person! Peter be11, 12. What did Peter do upon arriving in Caesarea, and what had he
learned?
138

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

gan with this powerful statement: “For a certainty I
perceive that God is not partial, but in every nation
the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Peter had learned
that God’s view of people is not determined by race,
nationality, or any other external factors. Peter proceeded to bear witness about Jesus’ ministry, death,
and resurrection.
13 Something unprecedented now happened: “While
Peter was yet speaking,” the holy spirit was poured out
upon those “people of the nations.” (Acts 10:44, 45)
This is the only reported case in the Scriptures of the
spirit’s being poured out before baptism. Recognizing
this sign of God’s approval, Peter “commanded them
[that group of Gentiles] to be baptized.” (Acts 10:48)
The conversion of these Gentiles in 36 C.E. marked
the end of the period of special favor to the Jews.
(Dan. 9:24-27) Taking the lead on this occasion, Peter
used the third and ?nal ‘key of the kingdom.’ (Matt.
16:19) This key opened the door for uncircumcised
Gentiles to become spirit-anointed Christians.
13, 14. (a) What was signi?cant about the conversion of Cornelius and
other Gentiles in 36 C.E.? (b) Why should we not judge people on the
basis of external characteristics?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

139

As Kingdom proclaimers today, we recognize that
“there is no partiality with God.” (Rom. 2:11) It is his
will that “all sorts of men should be saved.” (1 Tim.
2:4) So we must never judge people on the basis of external characteristics. Our commission is to bear thorough witness about God’s Kingdom, and that involves
preaching to all people, regardless of their race, nationality, appearance, or religious background.
14

“They Acquiesced, and They Glori?ed God”
(Acts 11:1-18)
15 No doubt eager to report what had happened, Peter headed for Jerusalem. Evidently, the news that uncircumcised Gentiles had “received the word of God”
preceded him. Soon after Peter arrived, “the supporters of circumcision began to contend with him.”
They were disturbed because he had entered “the
house of men that were not circumcised and had eaten
with them.” (Acts 11:1-3) The issue was not whether
Gentiles could become followers of Christ. Rather,
those Jewish disciples were really insisting that Gentiles needed to observe the Law—including circumcision—in order to worship Jehovah acceptably. Clear15, 16. Why did some Jewish Christians contend with Peter, and how
did he explain his actions?
140

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ly, some Jewish disciples had di?culty letting go of
the Mosaic Law.
16 How did Peter explain his actions? According to
Acts 11:4-16, he recounted four evidences of heavenly
direction: (1) the divine vision he had received (Verses
4-10); (2) the spirit’s command (Verses 11, 12); (3) the
angel’s visit to Cornelius (Verses 13, 14); and (4) the
pouring out of the holy spirit upon the Gentiles.
(Verses 15, 16) Peter concluded with a most compelling question: “If, therefore, God gave the same free
gift [of holy spirit] to them [believing Gentiles] as he
also did to us [Jews] who have believed upon the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to hinder
God?”—Acts 11:17.
17 Peter’s testimony posed a crucial test for those
Jewish Christians. Would they be able to put aside any
traces of prejudice and accept the newly baptized
Gentiles as their fellow Christians? The account tells
us: “Now when they [the apostles and other Jewish Christians] heard these things, they acquiesced,
and they glori?ed God, saying: ‘Well, then, God has
17, 18. (a) Peter’s testimony posed what test for Jewish Christians?
(b) Why can it be a challenge to preserve the unity of the congregation,
and what questions do we do well to ask ourselves?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

141

granted repentance for the purpose of life to people
of the nations also.’ ” (Acts 11:18) That positive attitude preserved the unity of the congregation.
18 Maintaining unity today can be challenging, for
true worshippers have come “out of all nations and
tribes and peoples and tongues.” (Rev. 7:9) We thus
?nd a diversity of races, cultures, and backgrounds in
many congregations. We do well to ask ourselves:
‘Have I rooted out of my heart any traces of prejudice?
Am I determined never to let this world’s divisive
traits—including nationalism, tribalism, pride in culture, and racism—in?uence the way I treat my Christian brothers?’ Recall what happened to Peter (Cephas) some years after the conversion of the ?rst
Gentiles. Yielding to the prejudice of others, he “went
withdrawing and separating himself” from Gentile
Christians and had to be corrected by Paul. (Gal. 2:1114) Let us keep ever on guard against the snare of prejudice.

19

“A Great Number . . . B ecame B elievers”
(Acts 11:19-26a)
Did Jesus’ followers start preaching to uncircum-

19. Jewish Christians in Antioch began preaching to whom, and with
what result?
142

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

cised Gentiles? Notice what happened later in Antioch
of Syria.1 This city had a large Jewish community, but
there was little hostility between Jews and Gentiles.
So Antioch o?ered a favorable atmosphere for preaching to Gentiles. It was here that some Jewish disciples
began declaring the good news to “the Greek-speaking
people.” (Acts 11:20) This preaching was directed not
only to Greek-speaking Jews but also to uncircumcised Gentiles. Jehovah blessed the work, and “a great
number . . . became believers.”—Acts 11:21.
20 To care for this ripe ?eld, the Jerusalem congregation sent Barnabas to Antioch. The thriving interest
evidently was more than he could handle alone. Who
was better suited to help out than Saul, who was to become the apostle to the nations? (Acts 9:15; Rom. 1:5)
Would Barnabas see Saul as a rival? On the contrary,
Barnabas showed due modesty. He took the initiative
to go to Tarsus, look for Saul, and bring him back to
Antioch to help. Together they spent a year building up the disciples in the congregation there.—Acts
11:22-26a.
1 See the box “Antioch of Syria,” on page 144.

20, 21. How did Barnabas show due modesty, and how can we show similar modesty when ful?lling our ministry?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

143

ANTIO CH OF SYRIA



Antioch of Syria was located on the river Orontes,
about 18 miles upstream from the Mediterranean seaport of Seleucia and some 350 miles north of Jerusalem. (Acts 13:4) Seleucus I Nicator, ?rst ruler of
the Seleucid Empire, founded Antioch in 300 B.C.E.
As the capital of that empire, Antioch soon acquired
great importance. In 64 B.C.E., Roman General Pompey made Syria a Roman province, with Antioch as its
capital. By the ?rst century C.E., the metropolis
ranked third in size and wealth among the cities of the
Roman Empire, after Rome and Alexandria.
Antioch was a commercial as well as a political center. The wares of all of Syria passed through it before
being exported to the rest of the Mediterranean basin.
“Since it was near the frontier between the settled
Graeco-Roman area and the eastern states,” says one
scholar, “it was even more cosmopolitan than most
Hellenistic cities.” There was a large Jewish community in Antioch, and according to Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, they “made proselytes of a great many
of the Greeks” who lived there.

How can we show modesty in ful?lling our ministry? This quality involves acknowledging our limitations. We all have di?erent strengths and abilities. For
21

144

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

example, some may be e?ective in placing literature
but have di?culty making return visits or starting Bible studies. If you would like to improve in some aspect of the ministry, why not ask for help? By taking
such initiative, you may become more productive and
reap greater joy in the ministry.—1 Cor. 9:26.
S ending “a Relief Ministration” (Acts 11:26b-30)
22 It was ?rst in Antioch that “the disciples were by
divine providence called Christians.” (Acts 11:26b)
That God-approved name aptly describes those whose
way of life is modeled on that of Christ. As people of the nations became Christians, did a bond of
brotherhood form between Jewish and Gentile believers? Consider what happened when a great famine occurred about 46 C.E.1 In ancient times, famines sorely
a?ected the poor, who had neither reserves of money nor extra food. During this famine, the Jewish
Christians living in Judea, many of whom apparently
were poor, were in need of provisions. Learning of
the need, the brothers in Antioch—including Gentile
1 The Jewish historian Josephus refers to this “great famine” during the reign of Emperor Claudius (41-54 C.E.).

22, 23. The brothers in Antioch made what expression of brotherly love,
and how do God’s people today act similarly?
“GOD IS NOT PARTIAL”

145

Christians—sent “a relief ministration” to the brothers in Judea. (Acts 11:29) What a genuine expression
of brotherly love!
23

It is no di?erent among God’s people today. When

we learn that our brothers—in another land or in our
own area—are in need, we willingly reach out to help
them. Branch Committees quickly organize the formation of relief committees to look after our brothers
who may be a?ected by natural disasters, including
hurricanes, earthquakes, and tsunamis. All such relief
e?orts demonstrate the genuineness of our brotherhood.—John 13:34, 35; 1 John 3:17.
24

As true Christians, we take to heart the meaning

of the vision that Peter received on the rooftop in Joppa over 1,900 years ago. We worship an impartial God.
It is his will that we bear thorough witness about his
Kingdom, which involves preaching to others regardless of their race, national origin, or social standing.
Let us, then, be determined to give all who will listen
an opportunity to respond to the good news.—Rom.
10:11-13.
24. How can we show that we take to heart the meaning of the vision
that Peter received?
146

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 10



“The Word of Jehovah
Went On Growing”
Peter is delivered, and persecution fails to stop the
spread of the good news
Based on Acts 12:1-25

WITH a resounding clang, the massive iron gate
swings shut behind Peter. Shackled between two Roman guards, he is led o? to his cell. He then endures
long hours, perhaps days, of waiting to learn what is to
be done with him. There is little for his gaze to fall on
but his prison walls and bars, his chains, and his
guards.
2 The news, when it comes, is grim. King Herod Agrippa I is determined to see Peter dead.1 In fact, Peter is to
be presented to the people after the Passover, his death
sentence a gift to delight the crowds. This is no empty
threat. One of Peter’s fellow apostles—James—has recently been executed by this same ruler.
1 See the box “King Herod Agrippa I,” on page 148.

1-4. What di?cult situation does Peter face, and how would you feel if
you were in his place?
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

147

KING HEROD AGRIPPA I



Herod Agrippa I, who had James executed and
Peter imprisoned, was the grandson of Herod the
Great. The Herods were a dynasty of political rulers
over the Jews. The family was Idumaean, that is,
Edomite. The Idumaeans were nominally Jewish,
since circumcision had been forced upon them in
about 125 B.C.E.
Born in 10 B.C.E., Herod Agrippa I was educated
in Rome. He cultivated friendships with various
members of the imperial family. One of those friends
was Gaius, better known as Caligula, who became
emperor in 37 C.E. He soon proclaimed Agrippa king
over Ituraea, Trachonitis, and Abilene. Later, Caligula
expanded Agrippa’s domain to include Galilee and
Perea.
Agrippa was in Rome when Caligula was
assassinated in 41 C.E. Reportedly, Agrippa played an
important role in resolving the crisis that ensued.
He participated in the tense negotiations between
another powerful friend, Claudius, and the Roman
Senate. The result was that Claudius was proclaimed
emperor and civil war was averted. To reward Agrippa
for his mediation, Claudius granted him kingship also
over Judea and Samaria, which had been administered
by Roman procurators since 6 C.E. Thus Agrippa
came to be in charge of territories equaling those of
Herod the Great.
148

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Agrippa’s capital was Jerusalem, where he won the
favor of the religious leaders. He is said to have
observed Jewish law and traditions scrupulously by,
among other things, o?ering sacri?ces in the temple
daily, reading the Law publicly, and playing “the role
of zealous protector of the Jewish faith.” However, he
belied his claim of being a worshipper of God by
arranging gladiatorial combats and pagan spectacles
in the theater. Agrippa’s character has been described
as “treacherous, super?cial, extravagant.”
3

It is the evening before the scheduled execution.

What is Peter thinking in the gloom of his prison cell?
Does he recall that years before, Jesus revealed that Peter would one day be bound and led against his will—to
his death? (John 21:18, 19) Perhaps Peter wonders if
that time has arrived.
4

If you were in Peter’s situation, how would you feel?

Many would despair, thinking that all hope is lost. For
a genuine follower of Jesus Christ, however, is any situation truly hopeless? What can we learn from how Peter and his fellow Christians reacted to the persecution
that befell them? Let us see.
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

149

5

“Prayer . . . Was B eing Carried On Intensely”
(Acts 12:1-5)
As we learned in the preceding chapter of this pub-

lication, the conversion of the Gentile Cornelius and
his family was a thrilling development for the Christian congregation. But nonbelieving Jews must have
been shocked to learn that many Jewish Christians
were now worshipping freely with non-Jews.
6 Herod, a canny politician, saw in this an opportunity to curry favor with the Jews, so he set about mistreating the Christians. No doubt, he learned that
the apostle James had been especially close to Jesus
Christ. Hence, Herod “did away with James the brother of John by the sword.” (Acts 12:2) What a trial for
the congregation! James was one of the three who had
witnessed Jesus’ trans?guration and other miracles
not revealed to the other apostles. (Matt. 17:1, 2; Mark
5:37-42) Jesus had called James and his brother John
“Sons of Thunder” because of their ?ery enthusiasm.
(Mark 3:17) So the congregation lost a bold, faithful
witness and beloved apostle.
5, 6. (a) Why and how did King Herod Agrippa I attack the Christian
congregation? (b) Why was the death of James a trial for the congregation?
150

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

The execution of James pleased the Jews, just as
Agrippa had hoped. Thus emboldened, he went after
Peter next. As described at the outset, he had Peter arrested. Agrippa likely recalled, though, that prisons
had not always proved e?ective in containing the apostles, as noted in Chapter 5 of this book. Taking no
chances, Herod had Peter chained between 2 guards,
with 16 guards working in shifts day and night to make
sure that this apostle did not escape. If he did, those
guards would themselves face Peter’s sentence. Under
such dire circumstances, what could Peter’s fellow
Christians do?
8 The congregation knew well what to do. Acts 12:5
reads: “Consequently Peter was being kept in the prison; but prayer to God for him was being carried on intensely by the congregation.” Yes, their prayers in behalf of their beloved brother were intense, heartfelt
pleas. The death of James had not plunged them into
despair; nor had it caused them to view prayer as
valueless. Prayers mean a great deal to Jehovah. If
they are in harmony with his will, he will answer them.
(Heb. 13:18, 19; Jas. 5:16) This is a lesson that Christians today will want to take to heart.
7

7, 8. How did the congregation respond to Peter’s imprisonment?
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

151

Do you know of fellow believers who are beset by
trials? They may be enduring persecution, governmental bans, or natural disasters. Why not make them the
subject of your heartfelt prayers? You may also know
of some who are undergoing less noticeable forms of
hardship, such as family troubles, discouragement, or
some challenge to their faith. If you meditate before
praying, you may think of a number of people to mention by name as you speak to Jehovah, the “Hearer of
prayer.” (Ps. 65:2) After all, you need your brothers
and sisters to do the same for you, should you come
upon hard times.
9

“Keep Following Me” (Acts 12:6-11)
10 Was Peter anxious about the danger he faced? We
cannot say for sure, but during that ?nal night in prison, he was fast asleep between his two vigilant guards.
This man of faith surely knew that whatever tomorrow might bring, he was safe with Jehovah. (Rom. 14:
7, 8) At any rate, Peter could not have anticipated the
amazing events that were about to unfold. Suddenly, a
9. What can we learn from the example set by Peter’s fellow Christians
in the matter of prayer?
10, 11. Describe the way that Jehovah’s angel delivered Peter from imprisonment.
152

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

bright light ?lled his cell. An angel stood there, evidently unseen by the guards, and urgently awakened
Peter. And those chains binding his hands—chains
that had seemed so unbreakable—simply fell o?!
11

The angel gave Peter a series of terse commands:

“Rise quickly! . . . Gird yourself and bind your sandals
on. . . . Put your outer garment on.” Peter readily complied. Finally, the angel said: “Keep following me,”
and Peter did so. They left the cell, walked right by the
sentinel guards stationed outside, and made their way
silently to the massive iron gate. How could they get
through that? If such a thought even formed in Peter’s
mind, it was short-lived. As they approached the gate,
it opened “of its own accord.” Before Peter knew it,
they passed through the gate and into the street, and
then the angel vanished. Peter was left there, and the
realization dawned on him that all of this had really
happened. This was no vision. He was free!—Acts 12:
7-11.
12

Is it not comforting to contemplate Jehovah’s

limitless power to rescue his servants? Peter was held
12. Why may we ?nd it comforting to contemplate Jehovah’s rescue of
Peter?
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

153

captive by a king who was backed by the strongest governmental power the world had ever seen. Yet, Peter
walked right out of prison! Granted, Jehovah does not
perform such miracles for all his servants. He had not
done so for James; nor did He do so for Peter later,
when Jesus’ words about this apostle were ?nally ful?lled. Christians today do not expect miraculous deliverance. However, we keep in mind that Jehovah has
not changed. (Mal. 3:6) And he will soon use his Son
to free countless millions from that most unyielding
of prisons, death. (John 5:28, 29) We can draw tremendous courage from such promises when we face trials
today.
“They S aw Him and Were Astonished” (Acts 12:12-17)
13

Peter stood in the dark street, deciding where to

go next. Then he knew. Living nearby was a Christian woman named Mary. Evidently a widow of some
means, Mary owned a house that was large enough to
accommodate a congregation. She was the mother of
13-15. (a) How did the congregation members meeting at Mary’s house
react to Peter’s arrival? (b) To what does the book of Acts shift its focus, but what e?ect did Peter continue to have on his spiritual brothers
and sisters?
154

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

John Mark, whom the Acts account mentions for the
?rst time here and who eventually became like a son to
Peter. (1 Pet. 5:13) On this night, many in that congregation were at Mary’s house despite the late hour,
praying earnestly. No doubt they were praying for Peter’s release—but they were not prepared for Jehovah’s answer!
14 Peter knocked at the door of the gateway, which
opened into a courtyard in front of the house. A
servant girl named Rhoda—a common Greek name
meaning “Rose”—came to the gate. She could not believe her ears. It was Peter’s voice! Instead of opening
the gate, the excited girl left Peter standing in the
street, ran back into the house, and tried to convince
the congregation that Peter was there. They said she
was mad, but she was not the type to be dissuaded.
She kept asserting what she knew to be true. Giving
in a bit, some suggested that it might be an angel
who was representing Peter. (Acts 12:12-15) All the
while, Peter kept knocking until, ?nally, they went to
the gate and opened it.
15 At the gate, “they saw him and were astonished”!
(Acts 12:16) Peter had to quiet their happy hubbub so
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

155

that he could tell his story, direct that it be passed
along to the disciple James and the brothers, and then
take his leave before Herod’s soldiers could ?nd him.
Peter went o? to continue his faithful service somewhere safer. Except for his contribution toward resolving the circumcision issue, as mentioned in Acts
chapter 15, he exits the account. The book of Acts next
turns its focus to the work and travels of the apostle
Paul. However, we can be sure that Peter strengthened
the faith of his brothers and sisters wherever he went.
When he left that group at Mary’s house, they were
certainly in a joyful frame of mind.
16 Sometimes Jehovah gives his servants more than
they could possibly expect, leaving them almost incredulous with joy. That was how Peter’s spiritual
brothers and sisters felt that night. It is how we may at
times feel when we experience Jehovah’s rich blessing
today. (Prov. 10:22) In the future, we will see all of Jehovah’s promises being ful?lled on a global scale. The
glorious realities will surely far exceed anything we
can imagine today. So, as long as we remain faithful,
we can count on many happy times ahead.
16. Why is the future sure to bring us many occasions for rejoicing?
156

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“The Angel of Jehovah Struck Him” (Acts 12:18-25)
17

Peter’s escape also astonished Herod—but his was

no pleasant surprise. Herod quickly ordered a thorough search, then had Peter’s guards interrogated.
They were “led o? to punishment,” likely execution.
(Acts 12:19) Herod Agrippa will not be remembered
for compassion or mercy. Was this cruel man ever
punished?
18

Agrippa may have felt humiliated over his fail-

ure to execute Peter, but he soon found solace for
his wounded pride. A diplomatic function arose
wherein some of his enemies had to sue for peace,
and he was no doubt eager to make a speech before
a large audience. Luke reported that in preparation,
“Herod clothed himself with royal raiment.” The
Jewish historian Josephus wrote that Herod’s garment was made of silver, so that when the light fell
upon the king, he seemed to be lit up with glory.
The pompous politician then gave a speech. The
fawning crowd cried out: “A god’s voice, and not a
man’s!”—Acts 12:20-22.
17, 18. What led up to the ?attering of Herod?
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

157

Such glory belonged to God, and God was watching! Herod had a chance to avoid disaster. He could
have rebuked the crowd or could at least have disagreed with them. Instead, he became a vivid illustration of the proverb: “Pride is before a crash.” (Prov.
16:18) “Instantly the angel of Jehovah struck him,”
causing that pu?ed-up egomaniac to su?er a gruesome death. Herod “became eaten up with worms and
expired.” (Acts 12:23) Josephus too noted that Agrippa was stricken suddenly and added that the king concluded that he was dying because of accepting the
?attery of the crowd. Josephus wrote that Agrippa lingered for ?ve days before he expired.1
20 Sometimes it may seem that ungodly people get
away with all manner of wickedness. That should not
surprise us, since “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19) Still, faithful servants of God are sometimes troubled when evil people
19

1 One doctor and author wrote that the symptoms described by Josephus and Luke might have been caused by roundworms forming a
deadly intestinal obstruction. Such worms are sometimes vomited
up, or they crawl from the patient’s body at the time of death. Notes
one reference work: “Luke’s professional exactness as a physician
brings out the horror of [Herod’s] death.”

19, 20. (a) Why was Herod punished by Jehovah? (b) What comfort may
we ?nd in the account of Herod Agrippa’s sudden demise?
158

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

seem to escape justice. That is one reason why accounts such as this one are comforting. In e?ect, we
see Jehovah stepping in, reminding all his servants
that he is a lover of justice. (Ps. 33:5) Sooner or later,
his justice will prevail.
21

This account concludes with an even more en-

couraging lesson: “The word of Jehovah went on growing and spreading.” (Acts 12:24) This progress report
on the expansion of the preaching work may remind us
of the way that Jehovah has blessed the same work in
modern times. Clearly, the record contained in Acts
chapter 12 is not primarily about the death of one
apostle and the escape of another. It is about Jehovah
and his thwarting of Satan’s attempts to crush the
Christian congregation and to quell its zealous preaching work. Those attacks failed, just as all such schemes
must fail. (Isa. 54:17) On the other hand, those who
side with Jehovah and Jesus Christ are part of a
work that will never fail. Is that not an encouraging
thought? What a privilege we have to help spread “the
word of Jehovah” today!
21. What is the primary lesson contained in Acts chapter 12, and why
may it comfort us today?
“THE WORD OF JEHOVAH WENT ON GROWING”

159

S E C T I O N 4 ? AC TS 13:1–14:28



“SENT OUT BY
THE HOLY SPIRIT”
ACTS 13:4
In this section, we will follow the apostle Paul
on his first missionary journey. In city after city,
the apostle was persecuted. Yet, led by holy spirit, he continued to bear witness, establishing new
congregations. This exciting record will surely
stimulate us to manifest even greater zeal in our
ministry.

CHAPTER 11



“Filled With Joy and
Holy Spirit”
Paul’s example in dealing with hostile,
unresponsive people
Based on Acts 13:1-52

IT IS an exciting day for the Antioch congregation.
Of all the prophets and teachers here, Barnabas and
Saul have been chosen by holy spirit to take the good
news to faraway places.1 (Acts 13:1, 2) True, quali?ed
men have been sent out before. In the past, though,
missionaries had journeyed to areas where Christianity had already taken root. (Acts 8:14; 11:22) This time,
Barnabas and Saul—along with John Mark, who will
serve as an attendant—will be sent to lands where
people are largely unfamiliar with the good news.
2

Some 14 years earlier, Jesus had said to his fol-

lowers: “You will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem
1 See the box “Barnabas—‘Son of Comfort,’ ” on page 162.

1, 2. What is unique about the journey that Barnabas and Saul are about
to make, and how will their work help ful?ll Acts 1:8?
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

161

BARNABAS—“S ON OF COMFORT”



A prominent member of the early Jerusalem congregation was Joseph, a Levite and a native of Cyprus. The apostles gave him an additional name,
descriptive of his personality—Barnabas, meaning
“Son of Comfort.” (Acts 4:36) When Barnabas saw a
need among his fellow believers, he hastened to
meet it.
At Pentecost 33 C.E., 3,000 new disciples were
baptized. It is likely that many of these had traveled
to Jerusalem for the festival and had not planned
to stay in the city for as long as they did. The congregation needed resources to care for this multitude.
Therefore, Barnabas sold a piece of land and generously brought the money to the apostles as a contribution.—Acts 4:32-37.
As a mature Christian overseer, Barnabas was eager to help others. It was he who aided newly
converted Saul of Tarsus when all the other disciples feared him because of his reputation as a persecutor. (Acts 9:26, 27) Barnabas responded humbly
when Paul gave him and Peter strong counsel concerning the proper relationship between Jewish and
Gentile Christians. (Gal. 2:9, 11-14) These few examples show that Barnabas truly lived up to his name
—“Son of Comfort.”
162

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

and in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant
part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) The appointment of Barnabas and Saul to serve as missionaries will spur on
the ful?llment of Jesus’ prophetic words!1
3

S et Apart “for the Work” (Acts 13:1-12)
Today, thanks to such inventions as the automobile

and the airplane, people can travel quite a distance
in just an hour or two. Such was not the case in the
?rst century C.E. Back then, the main mode of travel on land was to walk, often over rough terrain. A
day’s journey, perhaps covering just 20 miles, was exhausting!2 Thus, while Barnabas and Saul no doubt
eagerly looked forward to their assignment, they surely realized that considerable e?ort and self-sacri?ce
would be involved.—Matt. 16:24.
4

But why did the holy spirit speci?cally direct that

Barnabas and Saul be set apart “for the work”? (Acts
1 At this point, congregations can already be found as far away as
Syrian Antioch—some 350 miles north of Jerusalem.
2 See the box “On the Road,” on page 164.

3. What made long journeys di?cult in the ?rst century?
4. (a) What directed the choosing of Barnabas and Saul, and how did
fellow believers react to the appointment? (b) How can we give support
to those who receive theocratic assignments?
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

163

ON THE ROAD



In the ancient world, overland travel was slower,
more tiring, and probably more expensive than sailing. However, the only way to get to many places was
on foot.
A traveler could walk about 20 miles a day. He
would be exposed to the elements—sun, rain, heat,
and cold—and to the danger of being accosted by
thieves. The apostle Paul noted that he was “in journeys often, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from
highwaymen.”—2 Cor. 11:26.
A vast network of paved roads traversed the Roman
Empire. Along the main highways, travelers would
?nd inns spaced a day’s walking distance apart. Between these were taverns where one could obtain basic supplies. Contemporary writers describe inns and
taverns as being dirty, overcrowded, humid, and ?eainfested. They were disreputable places, frequented
by the worst elements of society. Innkeepers often
robbed travelers and included prostitution among
the services o?ered.
Christians no doubt avoided such places as much
as possible. When traveling in lands where they had
no family or friends, though, they would likely have
had little alternative.
164

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

13:2) The Bible does not say. We do know that the
holy spirit directed the choosing of these men. There
is no indication that the prophets and teachers in Antioch contested the decision. Instead, they fully supported the appointment. Imagine how Barnabas and
Saul must have felt as their spiritual brothers, without envy, “fasted and prayed and laid their hands upon
them and let them go.” (Acts 13:3) We too should support those who receive theocratic assignments, including men appointed as congregation overseers. Rather
than being envious of those who receive such privileges, we should “give them more than extraordinary consideration in love because of their work.”
—1 Thess. 5:13.
5

After walking to Seleucia, a harbor near Antioch,

Barnabas and Saul sailed to the island of Cyprus, a
journey of about 120 miles.1 As a native of Cyprus,
Barnabas no doubt was eager to bring the good news
to those in his home territory. Upon arriving at
1 In the ?rst century, a ship could travel about a hundred miles in
a day if winds were favorable. In unfavorable conditions, such a journey could take much longer.

5. Describe what was involved in witnessing on the island of Cyprus.
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

165

Salamis, a city on the eastern shore of the island, these
men wasted no time. Immediately, “they began publishing the word of God in the synagogues of the
Jews.”1 (Acts 13:5) Barnabas and Saul made their way
from one end of Cyprus to the other, likely witnessing in key cities along the way. Depending on the route
they took, these missionaries may have walked about
140 miles!
6

First-century Cyprus was steeped in false worship.

This became particularly apparent when Barnabas
and Saul reached Paphos, on the western coast of the
island. There, they met up with “a sorcerer, a false
prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar-Jesus, and he
was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent
man.”2 In the ?rst century, many sophisticated Romans—even “an intelligent man,” such as Sergius Paulus—often turned to a sorcerer or an astrologer for
1 See the box “In the Synagogues of the Jews,” on page 167.
2 Cyprus was under the rule of the Roman Senate. The principal administrator of the island was a provincial governor with the rank of
proconsul.

6, 7. (a) Who was Sergius Paulus, and why did Bar-Jesus attempt to dissuade him from listening to the good news? (b) How did Saul counteract
the opposition from Bar-Jesus?
166

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

IN THE SYNAG O GUES OF THE JEWS



Literally, “synagogue” means “a bringing together.”
It referred to an assembly or congregation of Jews
and eventually took on the meaning of the place or
building where the assembly was held.
It is believed that synagogues were instituted either
during or immediately after the Jews’ 70-year exile in
Babylon. Synagogues served as places for instruction,
worship, the reading of the Scriptures, and spiritual
exhortation. In the ?rst century C.E., each town in
Palestine had its own synagogue. Larger cities had
more than one, and Jerusalem had many.
Following the Babylonian exile, however, not all
the Jews returned to Palestine. Many traveled
abroad for business reasons. As early as the
fifth century B.C.E., Jewish communities existed
throughout the 127 jurisdictional districts of the
Persian Empire. (Esther 1:1; 3:8) In time, Jewish
quarters also developed in cities all around the
Mediterranean. These scattered Jews came to be
known as the Diaspora, or Dispersion, and they too
established synagogues wherever they settled.
In the synagogues, the Law was read and
expounded every Sabbath. Readings were delivered
from an elevated platform, surrounded on three sides
by seats. Participation in reading, preaching, and
exhortation was open to any devout Jewish male.
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

167

help in making important decisions. Nevertheless, Sergius Paulus was intrigued by the Kingdom message
and “earnestly sought to hear the word of God.” This
did not sit well with Bar-Jesus, who was also known
by his professional title Elymas, meaning “Sorcerer.”
—Acts 13:6-8.
7

Bar-Jesus was opposed to the Kingdom message.

Indeed, the only way he could protect his in?uential
position as adviser to Sergius Paulus was to “turn the
proconsul away from the faith.” (Acts 13:8) But Saul
was not about to watch a court magician divert the
interest of Sergius Paulus. So, what did Saul do? The
account states: “Saul, who is also Paul, becoming
?lled with holy spirit, looked at him [Bar-Jesus] intently and said: ‘O man full of every sort of fraud and
every sort of villainy, you son of the Devil, you enemy of everything righteous, will you not quit distorting the right ways of Jehovah? Well, then, look! Jehovah’s hand is upon you, and you will be blind, not
seeing the sunlight for a period of time.’ Instantly a
thick mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went
168

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

around seeking men to lead him by the hand.”1 The
result of this miraculous event? “The proconsul, upon
seeing what had happened, became a believer, as he
was astounded at the teaching of Jehovah.”—Acts 13:
9-12.
8

Paul was not intimidated by Bar-Jesus. Likewise,

we should not cower when opposers try to subvert
the faith of those who show interest in the Kingdom
message. Of course, we should let our expressions “be
always with graciousness, seasoned with salt.” (Col.
4:6) At the same time, we would not want to jeopardize the spiritual welfare of an interested person just
to avoid con?ict. Nor should we fearfully hold back
from exposing false religion, which continues “distorting the right ways of Jehovah” as Bar-Jesus did. (Acts
13:10) Like Paul, may we boldly declare the truth and
appeal to honesthearted ones. And even though God’s
1 From this point on, Saul is referred to as Paul. Some have suggested that he adopted the Roman name in honor of Sergius Paulus.
However, the fact that he retained the name Paul even after leaving
Cyprus points to a di?erent explanation—that Paul, “an apostle to
the nations,” decided henceforth to use his Roman name. He may
also have used the name Paul because the Greek pronunciation of his
Hebrew name, Saul, is very similar to that of a Greek word that has
a bad connotation.—Rom. 11:13.

8. How can we imitate Paul’s boldness today?
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

169

support may not be as obvious as it was in the case
of Paul, we can be sure that Jehovah will use his holy
spirit to draw deserving ones to the truth.—John 6:44.
9

A “Word of Encouragement” (Acts 13:13-43)
Evidently, a change took place when the men left

Paphos and set sail for Perga, on the coast of Asia
Minor, about 150 miles away by sea. At Acts 13:13,
the group is identi?ed as “the men, together with
Paul.” The wording suggests that Paul now took the
lead in the group’s activities. However, there is no indication that Barnabas became envious of Paul. On
the contrary, these two men continued to work together to accomplish God’s will. Paul and Barnabas
set a ?ne example for those who take the lead in the
congregation today. Rather than vying for prominence, Christians remember Jesus’ words: “All you are
brothers.” He added: “Whoever exalts himself will be
humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”—Matt. 23:8, 12.
10

Upon arriving at Perga, John Mark withdrew

9. How did Paul and Barnabas set a ?ne example for those taking the
lead in the congregation today?
10. Describe the journey from Perga to Pisidian Antioch.
170

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

from Paul and Barnabas and returned to Jerusalem.
The reason for his sudden departure is not explained.
Paul and Barnabas continued on, traveling from Perga to Antioch in Pisidia, a city in the province of Galatia. This was no easy trek, since Pisidian Antioch is
about 3,600 feet above sea level. The treacherous
mountain passages were also known for the prevalence of bandits. As if this were not enough, it is likely that at this point Paul was experiencing health problems.1
11

In Antioch of Pisidia, Paul and Barnabas entered

the synagogue on the Sabbath. The account relates:
“After the public reading of the Law and of the Prophets the presiding o?cers of the synagogue sent out to
them, saying: ‘Men, brothers, if there is any word of
encouragement for the people that you have, tell it.’ ”
(Acts 13:15) Paul stood up to speak.
12

Paul started out by addressing his audience: “Men,

Israelites and you others that fear God.” (Acts 13:16)
1 Paul’s letter to the Galatians was written several years later. In
that letter, Paul wrote: “It was through a sickness of my ?esh I declared the good news to you the ?rst time.”—Gal. 4:13.

11, 12. In speaking in the synagogue in Antioch of Pisidia, how did Paul
appeal to his audience?
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

171

Paul’s audience was made up of Jews and proselytes.
How did Paul appeal to these listeners, who did not
recognize Jesus’ role in God’s purpose? First, Paul
outlined the history of the Jewish nation. He explained
how Jehovah “exalted the people during their alien
residence in the land of Egypt” and how after their
release God “put up with their manner of action in
the wilderness” for 40 years. Paul also related how the
Israelites were able to take possession of the Promised Land and how Jehovah “distributed the land of
them by lot.” (Acts 13:17-19) It has been suggested
that Paul may have been alluding to certain Scriptural passages that had been read aloud moments before
as part of the Sabbath observance. If that is so, this
is yet another example showing that Paul knew how
to “become all things to people of all sorts.”—1 Cor.
9:22.
13

We too should strive to appeal to those to whom

we preach. For example, knowing the religious background of a person can help us choose topics that will
be of particular interest to him. Also, we can quote
13. How can we appeal to the hearts of our listeners?
172

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

portions of the Bible with which the individual might
be familiar. It may be e?ective to have the person
read from his personal copy of the Bible. Look for
ways to appeal to the hearts of your listeners.
14

Paul next discussed how the line of Israelite kings

led to “a savior, Jesus,” whose forerunner was John
the Baptizer. Then Paul described how Jesus had been
put to death and raised up from the dead. (Acts 13:2037) “Let it therefore be known to you,” Paul stated,
“that through this One a forgiveness of sins is being
published to you . . . Everyone who believes is declared guiltless by means of this One.” The apostle
then provided his listeners with this warning: “See to
it that what is said in the Prophets does not come
upon you, ‘Behold it, you scorners, and wonder at it,
and vanish away, because I am working a work in
your days, a work that you will by no means believe even if anyone relates it to you in detail.’ ” The
response to Paul’s speech was amazing. “The people began entreating for these matters to be spoken to them on the following sabbath,” the Bible
14. (a) How did Paul introduce the good news about Jesus, and what
warning did he provide? (b) How did the crowd react to Paul’s speech?
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

173

reports. In addition, after the synagogue assembly was
adjourned, “many of the Jews and of the proselytes
who worshiped God followed Paul and Barnabas.”
—Acts 13:38-43.
“We Turn to the Nations” (Acts 13:44-52)
15

On the next Sabbath, “nearly all the city” gath-

ered to listen to Paul. This did not please certain Jews,
who “began blasphemously contradicting the things
being spoken by Paul.” He and Barnabas boldly told
them: “It was necessary for the word of God to be
spoken ?rst to you. Since you are thrusting it away
from you and do not judge yourselves worthy of everlasting life, look! we turn to the nations. In fact, Jehovah has laid commandment upon us in these words,
‘I have appointed you as a light of nations, for you to
be a salvation to the extremity of the earth.’ ”—Acts
13:44-47; Isa. 49:6.
16

Gentile listeners rejoiced, and “all those who were

rightly disposed for everlasting life became believ15. What happened on the Sabbath following Paul’s speech?
16. How did the Jews react to the strong words of the missionaries, and
how did Paul and Barnabas respond to the opposition?
174

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ers.” (Acts 13:48) The word of Jehovah soon spread
throughout the country. The reaction of the Jews was
quite di?erent. In e?ect, the missionaries told them
that although God’s word had been spoken to them
?rst, they had chosen to reject the Messiah and hence
were in line for God’s adverse judgment. The Jews
stirred up the city’s reputable women and principal
men, “and they raised up a persecution against Paul
and Barnabas and threw them outside their boundaries.” How did Paul and Barnabas respond? They
“shook the dust o? their feet against them and went
to Iconium.” Was that the end of Christianity in Pisidian Antioch? Hardly! The disciples who were left
behind “continued to be ?lled with joy and holy spirit.”—Acts 13:50-52.
17

The manner in which these faithful ones respond-

ed to opposition provides a valuable lesson for us. We
do not stop preaching, even when prominent people
of the world try to dissuade us from proclaiming our
message. Note, too, that when the people of Antioch
17-19. In what ways can we imitate the ?ne example set by Paul and
Barnabas, and how will our doing so contribute to our joy?
“FILLED WITH JOY AND HOLY SPIRIT”

175

rejected their message, Paul and Barnabas “shook the
dust o? their feet”—a gesture that indicated not anger but a disclaiming of responsibility. These missionaries realized that they could not control how others
would respond. What they could control was whether
they would continue to preach. And preach they did
as they moved on to Iconium!
18

What about the disciples left in Antioch? True,

they were in hostile territory. But their joy was not
dependent on a positive response. Jesus said: “Happy
are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!”
(Luke 11:28) And that is precisely what the disciples
in Pisidian Antioch resolved to do.
19

Like Paul and Barnabas, may we always remem-

ber that our responsibility is to preach the good news.
The decision to accept or reject the message rests
squarely with our listeners. If those to whom we
preach seem unresponsive, we can take a lesson from
the ?rst-century disciples. By appreciating the truth
and allowing ourselves to be led by holy spirit, we too
can be joyful, even in the face of opposition.—Gal. 5:
18, 22.
176

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 12



“Speaking With Boldness by
the Authority of Jehovah”
Paul and Barnabas display humility,
perseverance, and boldness
Based on Acts 14:1-28

CHAOS reigns in Lystra. A man lame from birth
leaps about with joy after two strangers heal him.
People gasp in wonder, and a priest brings garlands
for the two men whom the crowd believe to be gods.
Bulls snort and bellow as a priest of Zeus prepares
to slaughter them. Cries of protest rise from the
throats of Paul and Barnabas. Ripping their garments
apart, they leap into the crowd and beg not to be
worshipped, barely restraining the adoring throng.
2

Then, Jewish opposers arrive from Pisidian Anti-

och and Iconium. With venomous slander, they poison the minds of the people of Lystra. The onceworshipful crowd now swirl around Paul and pelt
1, 2. What series of events unfolds while Paul and Barnabas are in Lystra?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

177

him with stones until he is unconscious. Their anger
spent, they drag Paul’s battered body outside the city
gates, leaving him for dead.
3

What led up to this dramatic incident? What can

present-day proclaimers of the good news learn from
the events involving Barnabas, Paul, and the ?ckle
inhabitants of Lystra? And how can Christian elders
imitate the example set by Barnabas and Paul as those
faithful men persevered in their ministry, “speaking
with boldness by the authority of Jehovah”?—Acts
14:3.

4

“A Great Multitude . . . B ecame B elievers”
(Acts 14:1-7)
Not many days earlier, Paul and Barnabas were

thrown out of the Roman city of Pisidian Antioch
after Jewish opposers stirred up trouble for them. Instead of becoming discouraged, however, the two men
“shook the dust o? their feet” against the city’s unresponsive inhabitants. (Acts 13:50-52; Matt. 10:14)
Paul and Barnabas peacefully departed and left those
3. What questions will we consider in this chapter?
4, 5. Why did Paul and Barnabas travel to Iconium, and what happened
there?
178

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

resisters to the consequences that would come from
God. (Acts 18:5, 6; 20:26) With undiminished joy, the
two missionaries continued their preaching tour. Trekking about 100 miles southeast, they reached a fertile plateau cupped between the Taurus and Sultan
mountain ranges.
5

Initially, Paul and Barnabas stopped at Iconium,

an enclave of Greek culture and one of the principal cities of the Roman province of Galatia.1 This
city sheltered an in?uential Jewish population and a
large number of non-Jewish proselytes. According to
their custom, Paul and Barnabas entered the synagogue and began preaching. (Acts 13:5, 14) They
“spoke in such a manner that a great multitude of
both Jews and Greeks became believers.”—Acts 14:1.
6

Why was the manner in which Paul and Barna-

bas spoke so e?ective? Paul was a storehouse of Scriptural wisdom. He masterfully linked references to history, prophecy, and the Mosaic Law in order to prove
1 See the box “Iconium—City of the Phrygians,” on page 180.

6. Why were Paul and Barnabas e?ective teachers, and how can we imitate them?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

179

ICONIUM—CITY OF THE PHRYGIANS



Iconium was located on a high, well-watered, and
fertile plateau. The city stood at a crossroads on
an important trade route linking Syria with Rome,
Greece, and the Roman province of Asia.
The local religion in Iconium was worship of the
Phrygian fertility goddess Cybele, which included
elements adopted from Greek worship during the
Hellenistic period. The city came under Roman
in?uence in 65 B.C.E., and in the ?rst century C.E.,
it was a large and prosperous center of trade and
agriculture. Although Iconium was home to an in?uential Jewish population, the city seems to have
retained its Hellenistic character. The Acts account,
in fact, refers to resident Jews and to “Greeks.”
—Acts 14:1.
Iconium lay on the border between the Galatian
regions of Lycaonia and Phrygia. Certain ancient
writers, including Cicero and Strabo, called Iconium
a city of Lycaonia, and from a geographic standpoint, the city did belong to that region. The Acts
account, however, distinguishes Iconium from Lycaonia, where “the Lycaonian tongue” was spoken.
(Acts 14:1-6, 11) For this reason, critics argued
that the book of Acts was inaccurate. In 1910,
though, archaeologists found inscriptions in the city
indicating that Phrygian was indeed the language
180

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

used in Iconium for two centuries following the visit
of Paul and Barnabas. Hence, the writer of Acts was
correct in distinguishing Iconium from the cities of
Lycaonia.

that Jesus was the promised Messiah. (Acts 13:15-31;
26:22, 23) Barnabas radiated concern for people. (Acts
4:36, 37; 9:27; 11:23, 24) Neither man relied on his
own understanding but spoke “by the authority of
Jehovah.” How can you imitate those missionaries in
your preaching activity? By doing the following: Become thoroughly familiar with God’s Word. Select
Scriptural references that are most likely to appeal
to your listeners. Look for practical ways to comfort
those to whom you preach. And always base your
teaching on the authority of Jehovah’s Word, not on
your own wisdom.
7

However, not all in Iconium were happy to hear

what Paul and Barnabas had to say. “Jews that did
not believe,” continued Luke, “stirred up and wrongly
7. (a) The good news produces what e?ects? (b) If your family is divided because of your obedience to the good news, what should you
remember?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

181

in?uenced the souls of people of the nations against
the brothers.” Paul and Barnabas discerned the need
to stay and defend the good news, and they “spent
considerable time speaking with boldness.” As a result, “the multitude of the city was split, and some
were for the Jews but others for the apostles.” (Acts
14:2-4) Today, the good news produces similar e?ects.
For some it is a force for unity; for others, a cause
for division. (Matt. 10:34-36) If your family is divided because you are obedient to the good news, remember that opposition is often a reaction to unfounded rumor or outright slander. Your ?ne conduct
could become the antidote to such poison and may
eventually soften the hearts of those who oppose you.
—1 Pet. 2:12; 3:1, 2.
8

After some time, opposers in Iconium hatched a

plot to stone Paul and Barnabas. When these two
missionaries were informed of it, they chose to move
to other witnessing territory. (Acts 14:5-7) Kingdom
proclaimers use similar discretion today. When faced
8. Why did Paul and Barnabas leave Iconium, and what lesson do we
learn from their example?
182

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

with verbal attacks, we speak with boldness. (Phil.
1:7; 1 Pet. 3:13-15) But when violence looms, we avoid
doing something foolhardy that would unnecessarily
endanger our lives or the lives of fellow believers.
—Prov. 22:3.

9

“Turn . . . to the Living God”
(Acts 14:8-19)
Paul and Barnabas headed for Lystra, a Roman

colony about 20 miles to the southwest of Iconium.
Lystra maintained strong ties with Pisidian Antioch
but, unlike that city, did not have a prominent Jewish community. While the inhabitants likely spoke
Greek, their mother tongue was Lycaonian. Possibly
because the city contained no synagogue, Paul and
Barnabas began preaching in a public area. While in
Jerusalem, Peter had healed a man born disabled. In
Lystra, Paul healed a man who was lame from birth.
(Acts 14:8-10) Because of the miracle Peter had performed, a great crowd had become believers. (Acts 3:
1-10) The miracle Paul performed led to a drastically di?erent outcome.
9, 10. Where was Lystra located, and what do we know about its inhabitants?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

183

10

As described at the outset of this chapter, when

the lame man leaped to his feet, the pagan crowd in
Lystra immediately drew the wrong conclusion. They
referred to Barnabas as Zeus, the chief of the gods,
and to Paul as Hermes, the son of Zeus and spokesman for the gods. (See the box “Lystra and the Cult
of Zeus and Hermes,” on page 186.) Barnabas and
Paul, however, were determined to make the crowd
understand that they spoke and acted not by the authority of pagan gods but by the authority of Jehovah, the one true God.—Acts 14:11-14.
11

Despite the dramatic circumstances, Paul and

Barnabas still sought to reach the hearts of their audience in the best way. With this incident, Luke recorded an e?ective way to preach the good news to
pagans. Note how Paul and Barnabas appealed to
their listeners: “Men, why are you doing these things?
We also are humans having the same in?rmities as
you do, and are declaring the good news to you, for
11-13. (a) What did Paul and Barnabas say to the inhabitants of Lystra? (b) What is one lesson that we can learn from the statements made
by Paul and Barnabas?
184

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

you to turn from these vain things to the living God,
who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and
all the things in them. In the past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways, although, indeed, he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven
and fruitful seasons, ?lling your hearts to the full
with food and good cheer.”—Acts 14:15-17.
12

What lessons can we learn from these thought-

provoking words? First, Paul and Barnabas did not
consider themselves superior to their audience. They
did not pretend to be something that they were not.
Instead, they humbly admitted to having the same
weaknesses as their pagan listeners. True, Paul and
Barnabas had received the holy spirit and had been
freed from false teachings. They had also been blessed
with the hope of ruling with Christ. But they realized that the inhabitants of Lystra could receive these
very same gifts by obeying Christ.
13

What is our attitude toward those to whom we

preach? Do we view them as our equals? As we help
others learn truths from God’s Word, do we, like Paul
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

185

LYSTRA AND THE
CULT OF ZEUS AND HERMES

Lystra was located in a secluded valley o? the
main highways. Caesar Augustus designated the city
a Roman colony, naming it Julia Felix Gemina Lustra. Its garrison was to defend the province of Galatia from local mountain tribes. The city was
thus administered according to traditional Roman
civic organization, with its o?cials bearing Latin titles. Even so, Lystra retained much of its local character. It remained more Lycaonian than Roman, and
indeed, the Lystran protagonists in the Acts account
spoke the Lycaonian tongue.
Among the archaeological ?nds in the vicinity of
ancient Lystra are inscriptions referring to “priests
of Zeus” and a statue of the god Hermes. An altar
dedicated to Zeus and Hermes has also been discovered in that area.
A legend recorded by the Roman poet Ovid
(43 B.C.E. to 17 C.E.) provides further background
for the Acts account. According to Ovid, Jupiter and
Mercury, the Roman counterparts of the Greek
gods Zeus and Hermes, visited the hill country
of Phrygia disguised as mortal men. They sought
hospitality in a thousand homes, but everyone
turned them away. Only an elderly couple, named
Philemon and Baucis, welcomed them into their
186

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

humble cottage. As a result, Zeus and Hermes transformed that home into a temple of marble and gold,
made the elderly couple its priest and priestess, and
destroyed the homes of those who had refused them
lodging. “If the people of Lystra remembered such a
legend when they saw Paul and Barnabas heal the
lame man,” says The Book of Acts in Its Graeco-Roman
Setting, “it is not surprising that they would want to
welcome them with sacri?ces.”

and Barnabas, avoid seeking adulation? Charles Taze
Russell, an outstanding teacher who took the lead in
the preaching work in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, set an example in this regard. He wrote: “We
want no homage, no reverence, for ourselves or our
writings; nor do we wish to be called Reverend or
Rabbi.” Brother Russell’s humble attitude re?ected
that of Paul and Barnabas. Likewise, our purpose in
preaching is not to bring glory to ourselves but to
help people to turn to “the living God.”
14

Consider a second lesson we can learn from this

speech. Paul and Barnabas were adaptable. Unlike
14-16. What second and third lessons can we learn from what Paul and
Barnabas said to the inhabitants of Lystra?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

187

the Jews and proselytes in Iconium, the inhabitants
of Lystra had little or no knowledge of the Scriptures or of God’s dealings with the nation of Israel.
Even so, those listening to Paul and Barnabas were
part of an agricultural community. Lystra was blessed
with a mild climate and fertile ?elds. Those people
could see ample evidence of the Creator’s qualities
as revealed in such things as fruitful seasons, and the
missionaries used this common ground in their appeal to reason.—Rom. 1:19, 20.
15

Can we likewise be adaptable? Although a farm-

er may plant the same type of seed in a number of
his ?elds, he has to vary the methods he uses to prepare the soil. Some ground may already be soft and
ready to accept the seed. Other soil may need more
preparation. Similarly, the seed we plant is always
the same—the Kingdom message found in God’s
Word. However, if we are like Paul and Barnabas, we
will try to discern the circumstances and religious
background of the people to whom we preach. Then
we will allow this knowledge to in?uence the way we
present the Kingdom message.—Luke 8:11, 15.
188

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

16

We can learn a third lesson from the account in-

volving Paul, Barnabas, and the inhabitants of Lystra. Despite our best e?orts, the seed we plant is
sometimes snatched away or falls on rocky soil. (Matt.
13:18-21) If that happens, do not despair. As Paul later reminded the disciples in Rome, “each of us [including each individual with whom we discuss God’s
Word] will render an account for himself to God.”
—Rom. 14:12.
“They Committed Them to Jehovah” (Acts 14:20-28)
17 After Paul was dragged outside Lystra and left
for dead, the disciples surrounded him and he got
up and found shelter in the city overnight. The next
day, Paul and Barnabas began the 60-mile journey to
Derbe. We can only imagine the discomfort Paul felt
during this arduous trip, having been pelted with
stones just hours earlier. Still, he and Barnabas persevered, and when they arrived in Derbe, they made
“quite a few disciples.” Then, rather than taking the
shorter route back to their home base in Syrian Antioch, “they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to
17. After leaving Derbe, where did Paul and Barnabas travel, and why?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

189

[Pisidian] Antioch.” For what purpose? To strengthen “the souls of the disciples, encouraging them to
remain in the faith.” (Acts 14:20-22) What an example those two men set! They placed the interests of
the congregation ahead of their own comfort. Traveling overseers and missionaries in modern times have
imitated their example.
18

In addition to strengthening the disciples by their

words and example, Paul and Barnabas appointed
“older men for them in each congregation.” Although
“sent out by the holy spirit” on this missionary journey, Paul and Barnabas still prayed and fasted when
“they committed them [the older men] to Jehovah.”
(Acts 13:1-4; 14:23) A similar pattern is followed today. Before recommendations for appointments are
made, the local body of elders prayerfully reviews a
brother’s Scriptural quali?cations. (1 Tim. 3:1-10, 12,
13; Titus 1:5-9) The length of time he has been a
Christian is not the main determining factor. Instead,
the brother’s speech, conduct, and reputation give evidence of the degree to which holy spirit operates in
18. What is involved in the appointment of older men?
190

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

his life. His meeting the requirements for overseers
as set out in the Scriptures determines whether he
is quali?ed to serve as a shepherd of the ?ock.—Gal.
5:22, 23.
19

Appointed elders know that they are accountable

to God for the way that they treat the congregation.
(Heb. 13:17; 1 Pet. 5:1-3) Like Paul and Barnabas,
elders take the lead in the preaching work. They
strengthen fellow disciples with their words. And they
are willing to place the interests of the congregation
ahead of their own comfort.—Phil. 2:3, 4.
20

When Paul and Barnabas ?nally returned to their

missionary base in Syrian Antioch, they reported “the
many things God had done by means of them, and
that he had opened to the nations the door to faith.”
(Acts 14:27) As we read about the faithful work of
our Christian brothers and see how Jehovah blessed
their e?orts, we will be encouraged to keep on “speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah.”
19. Elders know that they have what accountability, and how do they imitate Paul and Barnabas?
20. How do we bene?t from reading reports about the faithful work of
our brothers?
“SPEAKING WITH BOLDNESS BY THE AUTHORITY OF JEHOVAH”

191

S E C T I O N 5 ? AC TS 15:1-35



“THE APOSTLES AND THE
OLDER MEN GATHERED
TOGETHER”
ACTS 15:6
A heated issue arose that threatened the peace
and unity of the congregations. To whom did the
congregations look for direction and guidance to
resolve the dispute? In this section, we will gain
insight into the way the ?rst-century congregation was organized, which sets a pattern for God’s
people today.

CHAPTER 13



“There Had Occurred No
Little Dissension”
The issue of circumcision goes
before the governing body
Based on Acts 15:1-12

ELATED, Paul and Barnabas have just returned to the
Syrian city of Antioch from their ?rst missionary tour.
They are thrilled that Jehovah has “opened to the nations the door to faith.” (Acts 14:26, 27) Indeed, Antioch itself is abuzz with the good news and “a great
number” of Gentiles are being added to the congregation here.—Acts 11:20-26.
2

The exciting news about this in?ux soon reaches

Judea. But instead of bringing joy to all, this development forces into prominence the ongoing debate about circumcision. What should be the relationship between Jewish and non-Jewish believers, and
how should the latter view the Mosaic Law? The
1-3. (a) What developments threaten to divide the early Christian congregation? (b) How may we bene?t from studying this account in the
book of Acts?
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

193

issue causes dissension that becomes so serious that
it threatens to split the Christian congregation into
factions. How will this matter be resolved?
3

As we consider this account in the book of Acts,

we will learn many valuable lessons. These may help
us to act wisely should potentially divisive issues arise
in our day.
4

“Unless You Get Circumcised” (Acts 15:1)
The disciple Luke wrote: “Certain men came down

[to Antioch] from Judea and began to teach the brothers: ‘Unless you get circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.’ ” (Acts 15:1)
Whether these “certain men” had been Pharisees before converting to Christianity is not stated. At the
very least, they appear to have been in?uenced by that
Jewish sect’s legalistic thinking. Also, they may have
wrongly claimed to speak for the apostles and older
men in Jerusalem. (Acts 15:23, 24) Why, though, were
Jewish believers still promoting circumcision some 13
years after the apostle Peter, as directed by God, had
4. What wrong views were certain believers promoting, and what question does this raise?
194

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

welcomed uncircumcised Gentiles into the Christian
congregation?1—Acts 10:24-29, 44-48.
5

The reasons may have been many. For one thing,

male circumcision had been instituted by Jehovah
himself, and it was a sign of a special relationship with
him. Predating the Law covenant but later becoming
part of it, circumcision began with Abraham and his
household.2 (Lev. 12:2, 3) Under the Mosaic Law, even
aliens had to be circumcised before they could enjoy
certain privileges, such as eating the Passover meal.
(Ex. 12:43, 44, 48, 49) Indeed, in the Jewish mind, for
a man to be uncircumcised was to be unclean, contemptible.—Isa. 52:1.
6

Thus, it required faith and humility on the part of

Jewish believers to adjust to revealed truth. The Law
covenant had been replaced by the new covenant, so
1 See the box “The Teachings of the Judaizers,” on page 196.
2 The covenant of circumcision was not part of the Abrahamic covenant, which remains in force to this day. The Abrahamic covenant
went into e?ect in 1943 B.C.E. when Abraham (then Abram) crossed
the Euphrates on his way to Canaan. He was then 75 years of age.
The covenant of circumcision was made later, in 1919 B.C.E., when
Abraham was 99 years old.—Gen. 12:1-8; 17:1, 9-14; Gal. 3:17.

5, 6. (a) Why may some Jewish Christians have wanted to cling to circumcision? (b) Was the covenant of circumcision part of the Abrahamic
covenant? Explain. (See footnote.)
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

195

THE TEACHINGS OF THE JUDAIZERS



Even after the ?rst-century governing body settled the circumcision issue, certain individuals who
claimed to be Christians stubbornly kept the question alive. The apostle Paul called them “false brothers” who wanted “to pervert the good news about
the Christ.”—Gal. 1:7; 2:4; Titus 1:10.
The Judaizers’ objective was apparently to appease the Jews, to keep them from opposing Christianity so violently. (Gal. 6:12, 13) The Judaizers argued that righteousness was established by works of
the Mosaic Law in such matters as diet, circumcision, and Jewish festivals.—Col. 2:16.
Understandably, those who held to these views felt
uncomfortable in the presence of Gentile believers.
Sadly, such unwholesome feelings were even manifest among a number of reputable Christians of Jewish background. For example, when representatives
from the Jerusalem congregation visited Antioch,
they kept separate from their Gentile brothers. Even
Peter, who until then had freely socialized with the
Gentiles, withdrew—not even eating with them. Yes,
he went against the very principles he had earlier defended. As a result, Peter received strong counsel
from Paul.—Gal. 2:11-14.
196

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

birth as a Jew no longer automatically made one a
member of God’s people. And for Jewish Christians
who lived in Jewish communities—as did the believers in Judea—it took courage to confess Christ and to
accept as fellow believers Gentiles who had not been
circumcised.—Jer. 31:31-33; Luke 22:20.
7

Of course, God’s standards had not changed. Re-

?ecting this truth, the new covenant incorporated the
spirit of the Mosaic Law. (Matt. 22:36-40) In regard to
circumcision, for example, Paul later wrote: “He is a
Jew who is one on the inside, and his circumcision is
that of the heart by spirit, and not by a written code.”
(Rom. 2:29; Deut. 10:16) The “certain men” from Judea had not grasped these truths but asserted that
God had never revoked the law of circumcision. Would
they listen to reason?
8

“Dissension and Disputing” (Acts 15:2)
Luke continued: “When there had occurred no

little dissension and disputing by Paul and Barnabas with them [the “certain men”], they [the elders]
7. What truths had “certain men” failed to grasp?
8. Why was the issue of circumcision taken to the governing body in Jerusalem?
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

197

arranged for Paul and Barnabas and some others of
them to go up to the apostles and older men in Jerusalem regarding this dispute.”1 (Acts 15:2) The “dissension and disputing” re?ected strong feelings and
?rm convictions on both sides, and the congregation
in Antioch could not resolve it. In the interests of
peace and unity, the congregation wisely arranged to
take the question to “the apostles and older men in Jerusalem,” who made up the governing body. What can
we learn from the elders in Antioch?
9

One valuable lesson we learn is that we need to

trust God’s organization. Consider: The brothers in
Antioch knew that the governing body was made up
entirely of Christians of Jewish background. Yet, they
trusted that body to settle the question of circumcision in harmony with the Scriptures. Why? The congregation was con?dent that Jehovah would direct
1 Titus, a Greek Christian who later became a trusted companion
and emissary of Paul, appears to have been a member of the delegation. (Gal. 2:1; Titus 1:4) This man was a ?ne example of an
uncircumcised Gentile anointed by holy spirit.—Gal. 2:3.

9, 10. In what way did the brothers in Antioch as well as Paul and Barnabas set a fine example for us today?
198

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

matters by means of his holy spirit and the Head of
the Christian congregation, Jesus Christ. (Matt. 28:18,
20; Eph. 1:22, 23) When serious issues arise today, let
us imitate the ?ne example of the believers in Antioch by trusting God’s organization and its Governing
Body of anointed Christians.
10

We are also reminded of the value of humility and

patience. Paul and Barnabas had been personally appointed by holy spirit to go to the nations, yet they did
not invoke that authority to settle the issue of circumcision then and there in Antioch. (Acts 13:2, 3) Moreover, Paul later wrote: “I went up [to Jerusalem] as a
result of a revelation”—indicating divine direction in
the matter. (Gal. 2:2) Elders today strive to have the
same humble, patient attitude when potentially divisive questions arise. Instead of being contentious, they
look to Jehovah by consulting the Scriptures and
the instruction and guidance provided by the faithful
slave.—Phil. 2:2, 3.
11

In some instances, we may have to wait for Jeho-

vah to shed light on a certain matter. Remember that
11, 12. Why is it important to wait on Jehovah?
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

199

the brothers in Paul’s time had to wait until about
49 C.E.—some 13 years from the time of Cornelius’
anointing in 36 C.E.—before Jehovah brought the issue of whether Gentiles should be circumcised to a
resolution. Why so long? Perhaps God wanted to allow su?cient time for sincere Jews to adjust to such a
major change in viewpoint. After all, the termination
of the 1,900-year-old covenant of circumcision made
with their beloved forefather Abraham was no minor
matter!—John 16:12.
12

What a privilege it is to be instructed and molded

by our patient and kind heavenly Father! The results
are always good and always to our advantage. (Isa. 48:
17, 18; 64:8) So let us never proudly push ahead with
our own ideas or react negatively to organizational
changes or to adjusted explanations of certain scriptures. (Eccl. 7:8) If you detect even a hint of such a
tendency in yourself, why not meditate prayerfully on
the timely principles found in Acts chapter 15?1
13

The need for patience may arise when we study

1 See the box “Jehovah’s Witnesses Build Their Beliefs on the Bible,” on page 201.

13. How can we re?ect Jehovah’s patience in our ministry?
200

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

‘JEHOVAH’S WITNES SES BUILD
THEIR BELIEFS ON THE BIBLE’

As amply demonstrated in the case of the early
Christian congregation, the history of true worship
is a record of progressive spiritual enlightenment.
(Prov. 4:18; Dan. 12:4, 9, 10; Acts 15:7-9) Today, too,
Jehovah’s people adjust their beliefs to conform to
revealed truth; they do not force the Scriptures to ?t
their views. Impartial observers have recognized this
fact. In his book Truth in Translation, Jason David
BeDuhn, associate professor of religious studies at
Northern Arizona University in the United States,
wrote that Jehovah’s Witnesses approach the Bible
“with a kind of innocence, and [build] their system of
belief and practice from the raw material of the Bible
without predetermining what was to be found there.”

the Bible with people who ?nd it hard to abandon
cherished false beliefs or unscriptural customs. In
such cases, we may need to allow a reasonable amount
of time for God’s spirit to work on the heart of the
student. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) Also, we do well to make the
subject a matter of prayer. In one way or another and
at the right time, God will help us to know the wise
course to take.—1 John 5:14.
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

201

They Related Encouraging Experiences “in Detail”
(Acts 15:3-5)
14 Luke’s narrative continues: “After being conducted partway by the congregation, these men continued
on their way through both Phoenicia and Samaria, relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations,
and they were causing great joy to all the brothers.”
(Acts 15:3) That the congregation conducted Paul,
Barnabas, and the other travelers partway was an act
of Christian love that honored them, showing that the
congregation wished them God’s blessing. Again, what
a ?ne example the brothers in Antioch set for us! Do
you show honor to your spiritual brothers and sisters,
“especially those [older men] who work hard in speaking and teaching”?—1 Tim. 5:17.
15

En route, the travelers proved to be a blessing

to fellow Christians in Phoenicia and Samaria by
sharing with them “in detail” experiences about the
work in the Gentile ?eld. The listeners possibly included Jewish believers who had ?ed to those re14, 15. How did the congregation in Antioch honor Paul, Barnabas, and
the other travelers, and how did their presence prove to be a blessing to
fellow believers?
202

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

gions after Stephen’s martyrdom. Likewise today,
reports of Jehovah’s blessing on the disciple-making
work are a source of encouragement to our brothers, especially those undergoing trials. Do you bene?t fully from such reports by attending Christian
meetings, assemblies, and conventions as well as by
reading the experiences and life stories published in
our literature?
16 After traveling south some 350 miles, the delegation from Antioch finally reached their destination. Luke wrote: “On arriving in Jerusalem they were
kindly received by the congregation and the apostles
and the older men, and they recounted the many
things God had done by means of them.” (Acts 15:4)
In response, however, “some of those of the sect of
the Pharisees that had believed rose up from their
seats and said: ‘It is necessary to circumcise them and
charge them to observe the law of Moses.’ ” (Acts
15:5) Clearly, the question of the circumcision of nonJewish Christians had become a major issue, and it
had to be settled.
16. What shows that circumcision had become a major issue?
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

203

“The Apostles and the Older Men” Met Together
(Acts 15:6-12)
17 “With those consulting together there is wisdom,”
says Proverbs 13:10. In harmony with that sound principle, “the apostles and the older men gathered together to see about [the question of circumcision].” (Acts
15:6) “The apostles and the older men” acted in a representative way for the entire Christian congregation,
just as the Governing Body does today. Why were “the
older men” serving along with the apostles? Remember that the apostle James had been executed, and at
least for a period, the apostle Peter had been imprisoned. Might similar eventualities befall other apostles? The presence of other quali?ed anointed men
would help to ensure the orderly continuance of oversight.
18

Luke continued: “Now when much disputing had

taken place, Peter rose and said . . . : ‘Men, brothers,
you well know that from early days God made the
choice among you that through my mouth people of
17. Who made up the governing body in Jerusalem, and why may “the
older men” have been included?
18, 19. What powerful words did Peter speak, and what conclusion
should his listeners have reached?
204

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

the nations should hear the word of the good news and
believe; and God, who knows the heart, bore witness
by giving them the holy spirit, just as he did to us also.
And he made no distinction at all between us and
them, but puri?ed their hearts by faith.’ ” (Acts 15:7-9)
According to one reference work, the Greek word
translated “disputing” in verse 7 also denotes “a seeking,” ‘a questioning.’ Apparently, the brothers had
honest di?erences of opinion, which they openly expressed.
19

Peter’s powerful words reminded all that he him-

self was present when the ?rst uncircumcised Gentiles
—Cornelius and his household—were anointed with
holy spirit in 36 C.E. So if Jehovah had ceased making a distinction between Jew and non-Jew, by what authority should humans do otherwise? Moreover, faith
in Christ, not compliance with the Mosaic Law, puri?es a believer’s heart.—Gal. 2:16.
20

On the basis of the unassailable witness of both

the word of God and the holy spirit, Peter concluded:
“Now, therefore, why are you making a test of God by
20. How were the promoters of circumcision “making a test of God”?
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

205

imposing upon the neck of the disciples a yoke that
neither our forefathers nor we were capable of bearing? On the contrary, we trust to get saved through the
undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus in the same
way as those people also.” (Acts 15:10, 11) Promoters
of circumcision were, in fact, “making a test of God,”
or ‘straining his patience,’ as another translation renders it. They were trying to impose on Gentiles a code
that the Jews themselves could not fully comply with
and that therefore condemned them to death. (Gal. 3:
10) Instead, Peter’s Jewish listeners should have been
thankful for God’s undeserved kindness expressed
through Jesus.
21

Evidently, Peter’s words struck home, for “the en-

tire multitude became silent.” Thereafter, Barnabas
and Paul related “the many signs and portents that
God did through them among the nations.” (Acts 15:
12) Now, at last, the apostles and older men were in a
position to evaluate all the evidence and make a decision that clearly re?ected the will of God on the matter of circumcision.
21. Barnabas and Paul contributed what to the discussion?
206

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

22

Today, too, when the members of the Governing

Body meet, they look to God’s Word for direction and
pray earnestly for holy spirit. (Ps. 119:105; Matt. 7:711) To that end, each member of the Governing Body
receives an agenda ahead of time so that he can give
the items prayerful thought. (Prov. 15:28) At the meeting, these anointed brothers freely and respectfully express themselves. The Bible is used frequently during
the discussions.
23

Congregation elders should imitate that example.

And if after consideration at an elders’ meeting a serious matter remains unresolved, the body may consult
the local branch o?ce or its appointed representatives, such as traveling overseers. The branch, in turn,
may write to the Governing Body if necessary.
24

Yes, Jehovah blesses those who respect the theo-

cratic arrangement and who display humility, loyalty,
and patience. As we shall see in the following chapter,
the God-given rewards for doing so are genuine peace,
spiritual prosperity, and Christian unity.
22-24. (a) How does the Governing B ody today follow the example of
the early governing body? (b) How can all elders show respect for theocratic authority?
“THERE HAD OCCURRED NO LITTLE DISSENSION”

207

CHAPTER 14



“We Have Come to a
Unanimous Accord”
How the governing body reached a decision
and the unifying e?ect it had on the congregations
Based on Acts 15:13-35

SUSPENSE ?lls the air. The apostles and older men
occupying this room in Jerusalem look at one another, sensing that they have reached a pivotal moment.
The issue of circumcision has raised serious questions. Are Christians under the Mosaic Law? Is there
to be any distinction between Jewish and Gentile
Christians?
2

The men taking the lead have considered much ev-

idence. They have in mind God’s prophetic Word as
well as powerful ?rsthand testimony revealing Jehovah’s blessing. They have expressed themselves fully.
The evidence that has mounted regarding the issue
at hand is overwhelming. Jehovah’s spirit is clearly
1, 2. (a) What serious questions face the governing body of the ?rstcentury Christian congregation? (b) What help do those brothers receive
in order to reach the right conclusion?
208

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

pointing the way. Will these men respond to that direction?
3 It will take real faith and courage to accept the
spirit’s guidance in this case. They risk intensifying
the hatred of the Jewish religious leaders. And they
face resistance from men within the congregation who
are determined to lead God’s people back to reliance
on the Mosaic Law. What will the governing body do?
Let us see. In the process, we will see how those men
set a pattern that is followed by the Governing Body
of Jehovah’s Witnesses today. It is a pattern that we
too need to follow as we face decisions and challenges
in our life as Christians.
“The Words of the Prophets Agree” (Acts 15:13-21)
4 The disciple James, the half brother of Jesus, spoke
up.1 It seems that on this occasion he was acting as
chairman of the meeting. His words crystallized the
consensus that the body as a whole appears to have
reached. To the assembled men, James said: “Symeon
has related thoroughly how God for the ?rst time
1 See the box “James—‘The Brother of the Lord,’ ” on page 210.

3. How may we bene?t from examining the account in Acts chapter 15?
4, 5. What insight from God’s prophetic Word did James bring into the
discussion?
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

209

JAMES—“THE BROTHER OF THE LORD”



James, a son of Joseph and Mary, is listed ?rst
among Jesus’ younger half brothers. (Matt. 13:54, 55)
He may therefore have been Mary’s second-oldest
child. James grew up with Jesus, observed his ministry, and at least knew of Jesus’ “powerful works,”
whether he actually witnessed them or not. During
Jesus’ ministry, however, James and his brothers
“were, in fact, not exercising faith in him,” their older
brother. (John 7:5) James may even have shared the
sentiments of some of Jesus’ other relatives, who said
of Jesus: “He has gone out of his mind.”—Mark 3:21.
All of that changed with Jesus’ death and resurrection. Although three others named James are mentioned in the Greek Scriptures, it was evidently to
his half brother James that Jesus appeared personally during the 40 days after He was raised. (1 Cor.
15:7) This experience might have led James to the
right conclusion about his older brother’s true identity. In any case, less than ten days after Jesus ascended to heaven, James, his mother, and his brothers
were gathered with the apostles in an upper room to
pray.—Acts 1:13, 14.
James eventually became a highly respected member of the congregation in Jerusalem, apparently being regarded as an apostle, or “one sent forth,” of
210

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

that congregation. (Gal. 1:18, 19) James’ prominence
was evident when the apostle Peter, after being miraculously released from prison, told the disciples:
“Report these things to James and the brothers.”
(Acts 12:12, 17) When the circumcision issue came
before “the apostles and the older men” in Jerusalem,
James seems to have presided over the discussion.
(Acts 15:6-21) And the apostle Paul noted that James
along with Cephas (Peter) and the apostle John
“seemed to be pillars” of the Jerusalem congregation.
(Gal. 2:9) Even years later when Paul returned to Jerusalem from his third missionary tour, he reported
back “to James; and all the older men were present.”
—Acts 21:17-19.
This James, whom Paul called “the brother of the
Lord,” evidently wrote the letter, or Bible book, bearing his name. (Gal. 1:19) In that letter, James humbly
identi?es himself, neither as an apostle nor as Jesus’
brother, but as “a slave of God and of the Lord Jesus
Christ.” (Jas. 1:1) The letter of James shows that like
Jesus, James was a keen observer of the natural
world and of human nature. To illustrate spiritual
truths, James drew on familiar natural phenomena,
including windblown seas, starry skies, the scorching
sun, fragile ?owers, wild?res, and tame animals.
(Jas. 1:6, 11, 17; 3:5, 7) His divinely inspired insights
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

211

into people’s attitudes and actions provided excellent
counsel on maintaining healthy relationships.—Jas.
1:19, 20; 3:2, 8-18.
Paul’s words recorded at 1 Corinthians 9:5 suggest
that James was married. The Bible does not report on the time or circumstances of James’ death.
However, Jewish historian Josephus wrote that shortly after the death of Roman Governor Porcius Festus, about 62 C.E., and before his successor, Albinus,
took o?ce, Ananus (Ananias) the high priest “convened the judges of the Sanhedrin and brought before them a man named James, the brother of Jesus
who was called the Christ, and certain others.” According to Josephus, Ananus “accused them of having transgressed the law and delivered them up to be
stoned.”

turned his attention to the nations to take out of them
a people for his name. And with this the words of the
Prophets agree.”—Acts 15:14, 15.
5 The speech by Symeon, or Simon Peter, and the
evidence submitted by Barnabas and Paul probably
brought to James’ mind pertinent scriptures that shed
light on the subject under discussion. (John 14:26) After saying that “the words of the Prophets agree,”
212

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

James quoted the words of Amos 9:11, 12. That book
was listed in the part of the Hebrew Scriptures commonly called “the Prophets.” (Matt. 22:40; Acts 15:1618) You will note that the words quoted by James are
somewhat di?erent from those we ?nd in the book of
Amos today. It is likely that James quoted from the
Septuagint, a Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures.
6 Through the prophet Amos, Jehovah foretold that
the time would come when He would raise up “the
booth of David,” that is, the royal line leading to the
Messianic Kingdom. (Ezek. 21:26, 27) Would Jehovah
once again deal exclusively with ?eshly Jews as a nation? No. The prophecy adds that “people of all the nations” would be brought together as “people who are
called by [God’s] name.” Remember, Peter had just
testi?ed that God “made no distinction at all between
us [Jewish Christians] and them [Gentile believers],
but puri?ed their hearts by faith.” (Acts 15:9) In other
words, it is God’s will that Jews and Gentiles alike be
brought into the Kingdom as heirs. (Rom. 8:17; Eph. 2:
17-19) Nowhere did such inspired prophecies suggest
6. How did the Scriptures shed light on the discussion?
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

213

that the Gentile believers must ?rst be circumcised in
the ?esh or become proselytes.
7

Moved by such Scriptural evidence and the power-

ful testimony he had heard, James went on to o?er
these words for consideration: “Hence my decision is
not to trouble those from the nations who are turning
to God, but to write them to abstain from things polluted by idols and from fornication and from what is
strangled and from blood. For from ancient times Moses has had in city after city those who preach him, because he is read aloud in the synagogues on every sabbath.”—Acts 15:19-21.
8

When James said “hence my decision is,” was he as-

serting his authority—perhaps as chairman of the
meeting—over the other brothers and arbitrarily deciding what was to be done? Not at all! The Greek expression rendered “my decision is” may also mean “I
judge” or “I give an opinion.” Far from ruling over the
entire body, James was proposing for their consideration a course of action based on the evidence heard
and on what the Scriptures say about the matter.
7, 8. (a) What did James propose? (b) How should we understand James’
words?
214

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

9

Was James’ proposal a good one? Obviously it

was, for the apostles and the older men later adopted
it. With what bene?ts? On the one hand, the recommended course would not “trouble,” or “make it dif?cult for,” Gentile Christians by imposing upon
them the requirements of the Mosaic Law. (Acts 15:
19; New International Version) On the other hand, this
decision would show respect for the conscience of
Jewish Christians, who over the years had heard
“Moses . . . read aloud in the synagogues on every
sabbath.”1 (Acts 15:21) The recommended course
would surely strengthen the bond between Jewish
and Gentile Christians. Above all, it would please Jehovah God, re?ecting his advancing purpose. What a
?ne way to resolve a problem that threatened the unity and well-being of the entire congregation of God’s
people! And what an excellent example this is for the
Christian congregation today!
1 James wisely referred to the writings of Moses, which included
not only the Law code but also a record of God’s dealings and indications of His will that predated the Law. For example, God’s view
of blood, adultery, and idolatry can be plainly seen in Genesis. (Gen.
9:3, 4; 20:2-9; 35:2, 4) Jehovah thus revealed principles that are binding on all of mankind, whether Jew or Gentile.

9. James’ proposal o?ered what bene?ts?
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

215

As mentioned in the preceding chapter, like its
?rst-century counterpart, the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses today looks to Jehovah, the Universal
Sovereign, and Jesus Christ, the Head of the congregation, for direction in all matters.1 (1 Cor. 11:3) How is
this done? Albert D. Schroeder, who served on the
Governing Body from 1974 until he ?nished his earthly course in March 2006, explained: “The Governing
Body meets every Wednesday, opening the meeting
with prayer and asking for the direction of Jehovah’s
spirit. A real e?ort is made to see that every matter that
is handled and every decision that is made is in harmony with God’s Word the Bible.” Similarly, Milton G.
Henschel, a longtime member of the Governing Body
who ?nished his earthly course in March 2003, presented a fundamental question to the graduating students
of the 101st class of the Watchtower Bible School of
Gilead. He asked, “Is there another organization on
earth whose Governing Body consults God’s Word, the
Bible, before making important decisions?” The answer is obvious.
10

1 See the box “How the Governing Body Is Organized Today,” on
page 217.

10. How does the Governing B ody today follow the pattern set by its
?rst-century counterpart?
216

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

HOW THE G OVERNING B ODY IS
ORGANIZED TODAY

Like the ?rst-century Christians, Jehovah’s Witnesses today are directed by a Governing Body of dedicated, spirit-anointed men. The Governing Body meets
weekly as a group. Its members are also organized
into the following six committees, each having its own
responsibilities.
? The Coordinators’ Committee consists of the
coordinators of each of the other committees and
a secretary who is also a member of the
Governing Body. It helps all the committees to
operate smoothly and e?ciently. This committee
oversees legal matters and the use of the media
when necessary to convey an accurate picture of our
beliefs. It also responds to disasters, outbreaks
of persecution, and other emergencies a?ecting
Jehovah’s Witnesses anywhere in the world.
? The Personnel Committee oversees arrangements for
the spiritual and personal welfare of the volunteers
who serve in the branch o?ces of Jehovah’s
Witnesses earth wide. In addition, this committee
supervises the inviting of additional volunteers to
serve at branch o?ces.
? The Publishing Committee supervises the printing,
publishing, and shipping of Bible literature. It
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

217

?

?

?

218

oversees the printeries and properties owned and
operated by the corporations used by Jehovah’s
Witnesses and the construction of branch facilities,
as well as Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls in
lands with limited resources. This committee also
supervises the use of donated funds.
The Service Committee oversees the preaching work
along with matters a?ecting congregation elders,
traveling overseers, and full-time evangelizers. It
supervises the preparation of Our Kingdom Ministry.
This committee also invites and assigns students of
Gilead School, for the training of missionaries,
and students of the Ministerial Training School,
designed for the instruction of unmarried
congregation elders and ministerial servants.
The Teaching Committee oversees the instruction
provided at assemblies, conventions, and
congregation meetings, as well as the development
of audio and video programs. It prepares
curriculums for Gilead School, the Pioneer Service
School, and other schools and arranges spiritual
programs for branch o?ce volunteers.
The Writing Committee supervises the production of
spiritual food in written form for the congregations
and for the general public. It also answers Bible
questions, oversees translation work worldwide, and
approves such material as drama scripts and talk
outlines.
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

The Governing Body relies on God’s holy spirit for
direction. Its members do not regard themselves as
the leaders of Jehovah’s people. Rather, like all
anointed Christians on earth, they “keep following the
Lamb [Jesus Christ] no matter where he goes.”—Rev.
14:4.

11

“S ending Chosen Men” (Acts 15:22-29)
The governing body in Jerusalem had reached a

unanimous decision on the issue of circumcision. For
the brothers in the congregations to act in unity, however, that decision had to be communicated to them
clearly and in a positive, encouraging way. How could
this best be done? The account explains: “The apostles
and the older men together with the whole congregation favored sending chosen men from among them to
Antioch along with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas who was called Barsabbas and Silas, leading men
among the brothers.” In addition, a letter was prepared and sent along with these men so that it could
be read in all the congregations in Antioch, Syria, and
Cilicia.—Acts 15:22-26.
11. How was the governing body’s decision communicated to the congregations?
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

219

12

As “leading men among the brothers,” Judas and

Silas were fully quali?ed to act as representatives of
the governing body. The delegation of four men would
make it clear that the message they brought was, not
simply a reply to the original inquiry, but the express
direction of the governing body. The presence of these
“chosen men” would forge a close bond between the
Jewish Christians in Jerusalem and the Gentile Christians in the ?eld. What a wise and loving arrangement!
It no doubt promoted peace and harmony among
God’s people.
13

The letter provided clear direction for Gentile

Christians not only regarding the circumcision issue
but also regarding what they must do in order to receive Jehovah’s favor and blessing. The key part of
the letter stated: “The holy spirit and we ourselves
have favored adding no further burden to you, except
these necessary things, to keep abstaining from things
sacri?ced to idols and from blood and from things
strangled and from fornication. If you carefully keep
12, 13. What good was accomplished by sending (a) Judas and Silas?
(b) a letter from the governing body?
220

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

yourselves from these things, you will prosper. Good
health to you!”—Acts 15:28, 29.
14

Today, harmony of belief and unity of action

prevail among Jehovah’s Witnesses, who total some
7,000,000 in well over 100,000 congregations around
the earth. How is such unity possible, especially in
view of the turmoil and divisive thinking prevalent in
today’s world? Principally, unity results from the clear
and decisive direction that Jesus Christ, the Head
of the congregation, provides through “the faithful
and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45-47) Unity also results
from the way the worldwide brotherhood cooperates
willingly with the direction of the Governing Body.
“They Rejoiced Over the Encouragement”
(Acts 15:30-35)
15

The account in Acts goes on to tell us that when

the delegation of brothers from Jerusalem reached
Antioch, “they gathered the multitude together
and handed them the letter.” How did the brothers
14. How is it possible for Jehovah’s people to work in unity in today’s
divisive world?
15, 16. What was the outcome of the circumcision issue, and what accounted for such a result?
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

221

there react to the direction from the governing body?
“After reading [the letter], they rejoiced over the encouragement.” (Acts 15:30, 31) In addition, Judas and
Silas “encouraged the brothers with many a discourse
and strengthened them.” In that sense, the two men
were “prophets,” much as Barnabas, Paul, and others
were called prophets—a term referring to those who
declared or made known God’s will.—Acts 13:1; 15:32;
Ex. 7:1, 2.
16 Jehovah’s blessing was clearly upon the entire
arrangement, bringing the issue to a happy resolution. What was the key to the positive outcome? Unquestionably, it was the governing body’s clear and
timely direction, based on God’s Word and on the
guidance of the holy spirit. Added to that was the loving, personal way in which the decisions were communicated to the congregations.
17 Following that pattern, the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses today provides timely direction to
the worldwide brotherhood. When decisions are made,
they are communicated to the congregations in a clear
and direct manner. One way is by visits of traveling
17. How was the pattern set for some features of visits by traveling overseers in our day?
222

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

overseers. These self-sacri?cing brothers travel from
one congregation to another, providing clear direction
and warm encouragement. Like Paul and Barnabas,
they spend much time in the ministry, “teaching and
declaring, with many others also, the good news of the
word of Jehovah.” (Acts 15:35) Like Judas and Silas,
they ‘encourage the brothers with many a discourse
and strengthen them.’
18

What about the congregations? What will enable

the congregations throughout the earth to continue to
enjoy peace and harmony in today’s divisive world?
Recall that it was the disciple James who later wrote:
“The wisdom from above is ?rst of all chaste, then
peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey . . . Moreover, the
fruit of righteousness has its seed sown under peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.” (Jas.
3:17, 18) Whether James had the meeting in Jerusalem
in mind or not, we have no way of telling. But from our
consideration of the events recorded in Acts chapter 15, it is certain that only when there is unity and
cooperation can there be Jehovah’s blessing.
18. How can God’s people be certain to continue to receive Jehovah’s
blessing?
“WE HAVE COME TO A UNANIMOUS ACCORD”

223

19

That peace and unity now existed in the Antioch

congregation was clearly evident. Rather than contending with the brothers from Jerusalem, the brothers in Antioch treasured the visit of Judas and Silas,
for it was only after “they had passed some time, they
were let go in peace by the brothers to those who had
sent them out,” that is, back to Jerusalem.1 (Acts 15:
33) We can be sure that the brothers in Jerusalem also
rejoiced when they heard what the two men had to say
about their journey. Thanks to Jehovah’s undeserved
kindness, their mission was happily accomplished!
20

Paul and Barnabas, who remained in Antioch,

could now focus their e?orts on taking a strong lead in
the evangelizing work, much as traveling overseers today do when they visit the congregations under their
care. (Acts 13:2, 3) What a blessing for Jehovah’s people! How, though, did Jehovah further use and bless
these two zealous evangelizers? This we shall see in
the next chapter.
1 In verse 34, some Bible translations insert words to the e?ect that
Silas chose to remain in Antioch. (King James Version) However, such
words appear to be later additions.

19, 20. (a) How was it evident that peace and unity existed in the Antioch congregation? (b) What were Paul and Barnabas now able to do?
224

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

S E C T I O N 6 ? AC TS 15:36–18:22



“LET US RETURN
AND VISIT THE BROTHERS”
ACTS 15:36
What important role do traveling overseers
have in the Christian congregation? What blessings result when we accept theocratic assignments with a willing spirit? How can we reason
e?ectively from the Scriptures, and why do we
need to adapt to our audience? We will learn the
answers to these and other questions as we accompany the apostle Paul on his second missionary journey.

CHAPTER 15



“Strengthening the
Congregations”
Traveling ministers assist the congregations
to be made ?rm in the faith
Based on Acts 15:36–16:5

AS THEY make their way across the rugged terrain between towns, the apostle Paul looks thoughtfully at
the young man walking beside him. His name is Timothy. Youthful and full of vigor, Timothy is perhaps
in his late teens or early 20’s. Each step of this new
journey takes him farther from his home. As the day
fades, the region of Lystra and Iconium steadily recedes in the distance behind them. What lies ahead?
Paul has some idea, for this is his second missionary
journey. He knows that there will be hazards and
problems aplenty. How will the young man at his side
fare?
2

Paul has con?dence in Timothy, perhaps more

1-3. (a) Who is Paul’s new traveling companion, and what is he like?
(b) What will we learn in this chapter?
226

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

than this humble young man has in himself. Recent
events have made Paul more convinced than ever
that he needs to have the right traveling companion.
Paul knows that the work ahead—visiting the congregations and strengthening them—will require unswerving determination and unity of thought on the
part of the traveling ministers. Why might Paul feel
this way? One factor may be a disagreement that earlier caused a split between Paul and Barnabas.
3

In this chapter, we will learn much about the best

way to handle disagreements. We will also learn why
Paul chose Timothy as a traveling companion, and we
will gain insight into the vital role of those who serve
as traveling overseers today.
“Let Us Return and Visit the Brothers” (Acts 15:36)
4 In the preceding chapter, we saw how a delegation of four brothers—Paul, Barnabas, Judas, and Silas—built up the congregation at Antioch with the decision of the governing body regarding circumcision.
What did Paul do next? He approached Barnabas with
a new travel plan, saying: “Above all things, let us
4. What did Paul intend to do during his second missionary journey?
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

227

return and visit the brothers in every one of the cities
in which we published the word of Jehovah to see how
they are.” (Acts 15:36) Paul was not suggesting a mere
social visit to these newly converted Christians. The
book of Acts reveals the full purpose of Paul’s second
missionary journey. First, he would continue delivering the decrees that had been issued by the governing
body. (Acts 16:4) Second, as a traveling overseer, Paul
was determined to build up the congregations spiritually, helping them to grow ?rm in the faith. (Rom. 1:
11, 12) How does the modern-day organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses follow the pattern established by
the apostles?
5

Today, Christ uses the Governing Body of Jeho-

vah’s Witnesses to direct his congregation. Through
letters, printed literature, meetings, and other communication tools, these faithful anointed men impart
guidance and encouragement to all the congregations
around the world. The Governing Body also seeks to
maintain close contact with each congregation. They
5. How does the modern-day Governing B ody impart direction and encouragement to the congregations?
228

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

thus use the traveling-overseer arrangement. The Governing Body has directly appointed thousands of quali?ed elders around the world to serve as traveling ministers.
6

Modern-day traveling overseers focus on giving

personal attention and spiritual encouragement to all
in the congregations they visit. How? By following the
pattern set by such ?rst-century Christians as Paul. He
exhorted his fellow overseer: “Preach the word, be at
it urgently in favorable season, in troublesome season,
reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all long-su?ering and
art of teaching. . . . Do the work of an evangelizer.”
—2 Tim. 4:2, 5.
7

In harmony with those words, the traveling minis-

ter—along with his wife if he is married—joins the local publishers in various aspects of the ?eld ministry.
Such traveling preachers are zealous for the ministry
and are skillful teachers—qualities that have a positive e?ect on the ?ock. (Rom. 12:11; 2 Tim. 2:15)
Those in the traveling work are best known for their
self-sacri?cing love. They give freely of themselves,
6, 7. What are some of the responsibilities of traveling overseers?
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

229

traveling in unfavorable weather and even in dangerous areas. (Phil. 2:3, 4) Traveling overseers also encourage, teach, and admonish each congregation by
means of Bible-based talks. All in the congregation
bene?t by contemplating the conduct of these traveling ministers and imitating their faith.—Heb. 13:7.
8

“A Sharp Burst of Anger” (Acts 15:37-41)
Barnabas welcomed Paul’s proposal to “visit the

brothers.” The two had worked well as traveling partners and both were already acquainted with the regions and the peoples to be visited. (Acts 13:2–14:28)
So the idea of joining together for this assignment may
have seemed sensible and practical. But a complication arose. Acts 15:37 reports: “For his part, Barnabas
was determined to take along also John, who was
called Mark.” Barnabas was not simply o?ering a suggestion. He “was determined” to include his cousin
Mark as a traveling partner on this missionary journey.
9

Paul did not agree. Why? The account says: “Paul

8. How did Barnabas respond to Paul’s invitation?
9. Why did Paul disagree with Barnabas?
230

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

did not think it proper to be taking [Mark] along with
them, seeing that he had departed from them from
Pamphylia and had not gone with them to the work.”
(Acts 15:38) Mark had traveled with Paul and Barnabas on their ?rst missionary tour but had not stayed
the course. (Acts 12:25; 13:13) Early in the trip, while
still in Pamphylia, Mark had left his assignment and
gone home to Jerusalem. The Bible does not say why
he left, but the apostle Paul evidently viewed Mark’s
action as irresponsible. Paul might have had questions
about Mark’s dependability.
10

Still, Barnabas was adamant about taking Mark

along. Paul was just as adamant about not doing so.
“At this there occurred a sharp burst of anger, so that
they separated from each other,” says Acts 15:39. Barnabas sailed away to his home island of Cyprus, taking Mark along. Paul proceeded with his plans. The account reads: “Paul selected Silas and went o? after
he had been entrusted by the brothers to the undeserved kindness of Jehovah.” (Acts 15:40) Together
10. To what did the disagreement between Paul and Barnabas lead, and
with what result?
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

231

they traveled “through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening
the congregations.”—Acts 15:41.
11

This account may remind us of our own imperfect

nature. Paul and Barnabas had been appointed as special representatives of the governing body. Paul himself likely became a member of that body. Still, in this
instance, imperfect human tendencies got the better
of Paul and Barnabas. Did they allow this situation to
create a lasting rift between them? Although imperfect, Paul and Barnabas were humble men, having the
mind of Christ. No doubt, in time they manifested a
spirit of Christian brotherhood and forgiveness. (Eph.
4:1-3) Later, Paul and Mark worked together in other
theocratic assignments.1—Col. 4:10.
12

This one burst of anger was not characteristic of

either Barnabas or Paul. Barnabas was known to be a
warmhearted and generous man—so much so that
rather than calling him by his given name, Joseph, the
1 See the box “Mark Enjoys Many Privileges,” on page 233.

11. What qualities are essential to preventing a lasting rift from developing between us and someone who has o?ended us?
12. What should characterize modern-day overseers, in imitation of Paul
and Barnabas?
232

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

MARK ENJOYS MANY PRIVILEGES



Mark’s Gospel relates that those who arrested Jesus also tried to seize “a certain young man” who
escaped and “got away naked.” (Mark 14:51, 52)
Since Mark, also known as John Mark, is the only
one who records this story, the young man may have
been the writer himself. If so, Mark had at least
some personal contact with Jesus.
Some 11 years later, during Herod Agrippa’s persecution of the Christians, “quite a few” members of
the Jerusalem congregation gathered in the home of
Mary, Mark’s mother, to pray. It was to their home
that the apostle Peter made his way when he was miraculously freed from prison. (Acts 12:12) Thus,
Mark may have grown up in a house that was later
used for Christian meetings. He no doubt knew Jesus’ early disciples well, and they had a good in?uence on him.
Mark served side by side with a number of the
overseers of early Christian congregations. His ?rst
service privilege, as far as we know, was that of
working with his cousin Barnabas and the apostle
Paul in their assignment at Antioch of Syria. (Acts
12:25) When Barnabas and Paul embarked on their
?rst missionary journey, Mark traveled with them,
?rst to Cyprus and then on to Asia Minor. From
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

233

there, Mark returned to Jerusalem for unspeci?ed
reasons. (Acts 13:4, 13) After a disagreement between Barnabas and Paul concerning Mark, as described in Acts chapter 15, Mark and Barnabas continued their missionary service in Cyprus.—Acts
15:36-39.
All memories of that disagreement must have
been long put behind them by 60 or 61 C.E. when
Mark was once again working alongside Paul, this
time in Rome. Paul, who was a prisoner in that city,
wrote to the congregation in Colossae: “Aristarchus my fellow captive sends you his greetings, and
so does Mark the cousin of Barnabas, (concerning
whom you received commands to welcome him if
ever he comes to you).” (Col. 4:10) So Paul was
thinking of sending John Mark from Rome to Colossae as his representative.
Sometime between 62 and 64 C.E., Mark worked
with the apostle Peter in Babylon. As noted in Chapter 10 of this publication, they developed a close relationship, for Peter referred to the younger man as
“Mark my son.”—1 Pet. 5:13.
Finally, in about 65 C.E. when the apostle Paul
was imprisoned for a second time in Rome, he wrote
to his fellow worker Timothy, who was in Ephesus:
“Take Mark and bring him with you, for he is use234

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ful to me for ministering.” (2 Tim. 4:11) Doubtless,
Mark responded readily to that invitation and made
his way from Ephesus back to Rome. No wonder
this man was highly appreciated by Barnabas, Paul,
and Peter!
The greatest of all Mark’s privileges was his being
inspired by Jehovah to write a Gospel account. Tradition has it that Mark received much of his information from the apostle Peter. The facts seem to
support this view, for Mark’s account contains ?rsthand details that an eyewitness, such as Peter, would
have known. However, it would appear that Mark
penned his Gospel in Rome, not in Babylon when
he was with Peter. Mark uses many Latin expressions and translates Hebrew terms that would otherwise be di?cult for non-Jews to understand, so it
seems that he wrote primarily for Gentile readers.

apostles surnamed him Barnabas, which means “Son
of Comfort.” Paul too was known for his tenderness
and gentle demeanor. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) In imitation of
Paul and Barnabas, all Christian overseers today, including traveling ministers, should always strive to
show humility and to treat fellow elders as well as the
entire ?ock with tenderness.—1 Pet. 5:2, 3.
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

235

13

“He Was Well Reported On” (Acts 16:1-3)
Paul’s second missionary journey took him to the

Roman province of Galatia, where a few congregations had been established. Eventually “he arrived at
Derbe and also at Lystra.” “And, look!” says the account, “a certain disciple was there by the name of
Timothy, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of
a Greek father.”—Acts 16:1.1
14

Evidently, Paul had met Timothy’s family when

?rst traveling to the area about the year 47 C.E. Now
during his second visit two or three years later, Paul
took special notice of the young man Timothy. Why?
Because Timothy was “well reported on by the brothers.” Not only was he well-liked by the brothers in his
hometown but his reputation extended beyond the
boundaries of his own congregation. The account explains that the brothers both in Lystra and in Iconium, some 20 miles away, had good things to say about
him. (Acts 16:2) Guided by holy spirit, the elders
1 See the box “Timothy Slaves ‘in Furtherance of the Good News,’ ”
on page 237.

13, 14. (a) Who was Timothy, and under what circumstances may Paul
have met him? (b) What led Paul to take special notice of Timothy?
(c) What assignment did Timothy receive?
236

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

TIMOTHY SLAVES “IN FURTHERANCE OF
THE G O OD NEWS”

Timothy was a highly valued assistant to the apostle Paul. After the two men had worked side by side
for some 11 years, Paul could write concerning Timothy: “I have no one else of a disposition like his who
will genuinely care for the things pertaining to you.
. . . You know the proof he gave of himself, that like a
child with a father he slaved with me in furtherance
of the good news.” (Phil. 2:20, 22) Timothy readily
gave of himself in order to promote the preaching
work, thus endearing himself to Paul and setting a
?ne example for us.
The son of a Greek father and a Jewish mother,
Timothy seems to have been raised in Lystra. From
infancy, Timothy had been taught the Scriptures by
his mother, Eunice, and his grandmother Lois. (Acts
16:1, 3; 2 Tim. 1:5; 3:14, 15) Along with them, Timothy likely accepted Christianity during Paul’s ?rst
visit to Timothy’s hometown.
By the time Paul returned some years later, Timothy, then possibly in his late teens or early 20’s, was
already “well reported on by the brothers in Lystra
and Iconium.” (Acts 16:2) God’s spirit had inspired
“predictions” about the young man, and in harmony
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

237

with them, Paul and the local elders recommended
that Timothy undertake a special form of service.
(1 Tim. 1:18; 4:14; 2 Tim. 1:6) He was to accompany
Paul as a missionary companion. Timothy would
have to leave his family, and in order to eliminate a
possible cause for complaint among the Jews whom
Timothy would be visiting, he had to submit to circumcision.—Acts 16:3.
Timothy traveled extensively. He preached with
Paul and Silas in Philippi, with Silas in Beroea,
then alone in Thessalonica. When he again met up
with Paul in Corinth, Timothy brought good news
about the love and faithfulness shown by the Thessalonians despite their tribulation. (Acts 16:6–17:14;
1 Thess. 3:2-6) On receiving disturbing news about
the Corinthians, Paul, then in Ephesus, considered
sending Timothy back to Corinth. (1 Cor. 4:17) From
Ephesus, Paul later dispatched Timothy and Erastus
to Macedonia. But when Paul wrote to the Romans,
Timothy was back with him in Corinth. (Acts 19:22;
Rom. 16:21) These are just some of the journeys that
Timothy undertook for the sake of the good news.
That Timothy may have been somewhat hesitant
in exercising his authority is indicated by Paul’s encouragement: “Let no man ever look down on your
youth.” (1 Tim. 4:12) But Paul could con?dently dis238

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

patch Timothy to a troubled congregation with the
instructions: “Command certain ones not to teach
di?erent doctrine.” (1 Tim. 1:3) Paul also gave Timothy authority to appoint overseers and ministerial
servants in the congregation.—1 Tim. 5:22.
Timothy’s excellent qualities endeared him to
Paul. The Scriptures reveal that the younger man
was a close, faithful, and a?ectionate companion,
like a son. Paul could write that he remembered Timothy’s tears, longed to see him, and prayed for him.
Like a concerned father, Paul also gave Timothy advice about his “frequent cases of sickness”—apparently stomach problems.—1 Tim. 5:23; 2 Tim. 1:3, 4.
During Paul’s ?rst imprisonment in Rome, Timothy was by his side. At least for a period, Timothy
too endured prison bonds. (Philem. 1; Heb. 13:23)
The depth of feeling between these two men can be
gauged by the fact that when Paul perceived that his
own death was near, he summoned Timothy: “Do
your utmost to come to me shortly.” (2 Tim. 4:6-9)
Whether Timothy arrived in time to see his beloved
mentor again is not revealed in the Scriptures.

entrusted young Timothy with a weighty responsibility—to assist Paul and Silas as a traveling minister.
—Acts 16:3.
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

239

15

What earned Timothy such a good reputation

at his young age? Was it his intelligence, his physical appearance, or his natural abilities? Humans are
often impressed by such qualities. Even the prophet
Samuel was once unduly in?uenced by outward appearances. However, Jehovah reminded him: “Not
the way man sees is the way God sees, because
mere man sees what appears to the eyes, but as for
Jehovah, he sees what the heart is.” (1 Sam. 16:7)
Rather than any personal attributes, Timothy had
inner qualities that earned him a good name among
his fellow Christians.
16 Years later, the apostle Paul made reference
to some of Timothy’s spiritual qualities. Paul describ e d Timothy’s go o d disp osition, his selfsacri?cing love, and his diligence in caring for theocratic assignments. (Phil. 2:20-22) Timothy was also
known for having faith “without any hypocrisy.”
—2 Tim. 1:5.
17 Today, many young ones imitate Timothy by
15, 16. What was it about Timothy that earned him such a good reputation?
17. How can young ones today imitate Timothy?
240

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

cultivating godly qualities. They thereby make a
good name with Jehovah and his people, even at an
early age. (Prov. 22:1; 1 Tim. 4:15) They display faith
without hypocrisy, refusing to lead a double life.
(Ps. 26:4) As a result, many young ones can, like
Timothy, play an important role in the congregation. How they encourage all lovers of Jehovah
around them when they qualify as publishers of the
good news and in due time make a dedication to Jehovah and get baptized!
18

“Made Firm in the Faith” (Acts 16:4, 5)
Paul and Timothy worked together for years. As

traveling ministers, they carried out various missions
on behalf of the governing body. The Bible record
says: “As they traveled on through the cities they
would deliver to those there for observance the decrees that had been decided upon by the apostles and
older men who were in Jerusalem.” (Acts 16:4) Evidently, the congregations did follow the direction
from the apostles and older men in Jerusalem. As a
18. (a) What privileges did Paul and Timothy enjoy as traveling ministers? (b) How were the congregations blessed?
“STRENGTHENING THE CONGREGATIONS”

241

result of such obedience, “the congregations continued to be made ?rm in the faith and to increase in
number from day to day.”—Acts 16:5.
19

Similarly, Jehovah’s Witnesses today enjoy the

blessings that come from submissively obeying the direction received from “those who are taking the lead”
among them. (Heb. 13:17) Because the scene of the
world is always changing, it is vital that Christians
keep pace with the spiritual food provided by “the
faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45; 1 Cor. 7:2931) Doing so can prevent spiritual calamity and help
us to remain without spot from the world.—Jas. 1:27.
20

True, modern-day Christian overseers, including

members of the Governing Body, are imperfect, as
were Paul, Barnabas, Mark, and other anointed elders
in the ?rst century. (Rom. 5:12; Jas. 3:2) But because
the Governing Body strictly follows God’s Word and
sticks to the pattern set by the apostles, they prove
themselves trustworthy. (2 Tim. 1:13, 14) As a result,
the congregations are being strengthened and made
?rm in the faith.
19, 20. Why should Christians be obedient to “those who are taking the
lead”?
242

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 16



“Step Over Into Macedonia”
Blessings result from accepting an assignment
and meeting persecution with joy
Based on Acts 16:6-40

A GROUP of women leave the city of Philippi in Macedonia. Before long, they reach the narrow river Gangites. As is their custom, they sit down at the river bank
to pray to the God of Israel. Jehovah observes them.
—2 Chron. 16:9; Ps. 65:2.
2

Meanwhile, more than 500 miles east of Philippi, a

group of men leave the city of Lystra in southern Galatia. Days later, they reach a paved Roman highway leading westward to the most populated region of the district of Asia. The men—Paul, Silas, and Timothy—are
eager to travel down that road so as to visit Ephesus
and other cities where thousands of people need to hear
about Christ. Yet, even before they can start the journey, the holy spirit stops them in some undisclosed
manner. They are forbidden to preach in Asia. Why?
1-3. (a) How did Paul and his companions experience the direction of
the holy spirit? (b) What events will we consider?
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

243

Jesus—by means of God’s spirit—wants to guide Paul’s
party all the way through Asia Minor, across the Aegean Sea, and onward to the banks of that little river
named Gangites.
3

The way that Jesus guided Paul and his companions

during that unusual journey into Macedonia contains
valuable lessons for us today. Therefore, let us review
some of the events that occurred during Paul’s second
missionary tour, which began in about 49 C.E.
4

“God Had Summoned Us” (Acts 16:6-15)
Prevented from preaching in Asia, Paul and his

companions turned northward to preach in the cities of
Bithynia. To get there, they may have walked for days
on unpaved trails between the sparsely populated regions of Phrygia and Galatia. However, when they
neared Bithynia, Jesus again used the holy spirit to
block them. (Acts 16:6, 7) By then, the men must have
been puzzled. They knew what to preach and how to
preach, but they did not know where to preach. They
had knocked, as it were, on the door leading to Asia
—but in vain. They had knocked on the door lead4, 5. (a) What happened to Paul’s party near Bithynia? (b) What decision did the disciples make, and with what result?
244

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ing to Bithynia—again in vain. Still, Paul was determined to keep on knocking until he found a door that
would open. The men then made a decision that might
have seemed erratic. They turned west and walked for
350 miles, bypassing city after city until they reached
the port of Troas, the natural gateway to Macedonia.
(Acts 16:8) There, for the third time, Paul knocked on
a door, and—yes!—it swung wide open.
5

The Gospel writer Luke, who joined Paul’s party at

Troas, reports what happened: “During the night a vision appeared to Paul: a certain Macedonian man was
standing and entreating him and saying: ‘Step over into
Macedonia and help us.’ Now as soon as he had seen
the vision, we sought to go forth into Macedonia, drawing the conclusion that God had summoned us to declare the good news to them.”1 (Acts 16:9, 10) Finally,
Paul knew where to preach. How happy Paul must have
felt that he had not given up halfway through the journey! Immediately, the four men sailed for Macedonia.
6

What lesson can we learn from that account? Note

1 See the box “Luke—The Writer of Acts,” on page 246.

6, 7. (a) What lesson can we learn from what took place during Paul’s
journey? (b) What assurance can we derive from Paul’s experience?
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

245

LUKE —THE WRITER OF ACTS



Up to chapter 16, verse 9, the book of Acts is narrated strictly in the third person. That is, the writer
limits himself to reporting what others said and did.
At Acts 16:10, 11, however, there is a change in that
style. In verse 11, for instance, the writer says: “We
put out to sea from Troas and came with a straight
run to Samothrace.” This is where Luke, the writer,
joined the action. But since Luke’s name does not
appear anywhere in Acts of Apostles, how do we
know that he was, in fact, the writer?
The answer lies in the introductions to the book
of Acts and Luke’s Gospel. Both introductions are
addressed to a certain “Theophilus.” (Luke 1:1, 3;
Acts 1:1) The opening words of Acts read: “The ?rst
account, O Theophilus, I composed about all the
things Jesus started both to do and to teach.” Since
ancient authorities agree that “the ?rst account,”
the Gospel, was written by Luke, he must also have
written Acts.
We do not know very much about Luke. His name
appears only three times in the Bible. The apostle
Paul calls Luke “the beloved physician” and one of
his own “fellow workers.” (Col. 4:14; Philem. 24)
The “we” sections of the book of Acts—those in
which Luke includes himself in the narrative—indi246

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

cate that Luke ?rst accompanied the apostle Paul
from Troas to Philippi in about 50 C.E. but that
when Paul left Philippi, Luke was no longer with
him. The two men met up again in Philippi in about
56 C.E. and traveled with seven other brothers from
Philippi to Jerusalem, where Paul was arrested. Two
years later, Luke accompanied Paul, who was still in
chains, from Caesarea to Rome. (Acts 16:10-17, 40;
20:5–21:17; 24:27; 27:1–28:16) When Paul, who had
been jailed for a second time in Rome, perceived
that his execution was near, “Luke alone” was with
him. (2 Tim. 4:6, 11) It is clear that Luke traveled
long distances and was willing to su?er hardships
for the sake of the good news.
Luke did not claim to have witnessed what he
wrote about Jesus. On the contrary, he said that he
undertook “to compile a statement of the facts”
based on the accounts of “eyewitnesses.” Moreover,
he “traced all things from the start with accuracy,
to write them in logical order.” (Luke 1:1-3) The results of Luke’s labors show that he was a careful
researcher. Perhaps he conducted interviews with
Elizabeth, with Jesus’ mother, Mary, and with others in order to collect his material. Much of what he
wrote is unique among the Gospel accounts.—Luke
1:5-80.
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

247

Paul stated that Luke was a physician, and a
doctor’s interest in those who su?er can be perceived in what he wrote. Just to mention a few
examples: Luke noted that when Jesus cured a
demon-possessed man, “the demon came out of
him without hurting him”; that the apostle Peter’s
mother-in-law was distressed with “a high fever”;
and that a woman whom Jesus helped had been af?icted with “a spirit of weakness for eighteen years,
and she was bent double and was unable to raise herself up at all.”—Luke 4:35, 38; 13:11.
Clearly, Luke put “the work of the Lord” ?rst in
his life. (1 Cor. 15:58) His objective was, not to pursue a secular career or prominence, but simply to
help others know and serve Jehovah.

this: Only after Paul set out for Asia did God’s spirit intervene, only after Paul neared Bithynia did Jesus step
in, and only after Paul reached Troas did Jesus direct
him to Macedonia. Jesus, as Head of the congregation,
may deal with us in a similar way today. (Col. 1:18) For
instance, we may have been thinking for some time
about serving as a pioneer or moving to an area where
the need for Kingdom publishers is greater. However,
it may well be only after we take de?nite steps to attain
248

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

our goal that Jesus, through God’s spirit, will guide us.
Why? Think of this example: A driver can direct his car
to turn left or right but only if the car is moving. Similarly, Jesus directs us in expanding our ministry, but
only if we are moving—if we are putting forth real effort to do so.
7 What, though, if our e?orts do not bear fruit
right away? Should we give up, thinking that God’s
spirit is not guiding us? No. Remember that Paul
too encountered setbacks. Yet, he kept on searching
until he found a door that opened. We can be sure
that our perseverance in searching for “a large door
that leads to activity” will be similarly rewarded.
—1 Cor. 16:9.
8 After arriving in the district of Macedonia, Paul’s
party traveled to Philippi—a city whose inhabitants
were proud to be Roman citizens. For the retired Roman soldiers living there, the colony of Philippi was
like a little Italy—a miniature Rome planted in Macedonia. Outside the city gate, beside a narrow river,
the missionaries found an area where they thought
8. (a) Describe the city of Philippi. (b) What joyful event resulted from
Paul’s preaching at “a place of prayer”?
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

249

there was “a place of prayer.”1 On the Sabbath, they
went down to that spot and found several women who
gathered there to worship God. The disciples sat down
and spoke to them. A woman named Lydia “was listening, and Jehovah opened her heart wide.” Lydia was so
moved by what she learned from the missionaries that
she and her household got baptized. Then she made
Paul and his traveling companions come and stay at her
home.2—Acts 16:13-15.
9

Imagine the joy occasioned by Lydia’s baptism! How

glad Paul must have been that he had accepted the invitation to “step over into Macedonia” and that Jehovah had seen ?t to use him and his companions to answer the prayers of those God-fearing women! Today,
numerous brothers and sisters—young and old, single
and married—likewise move to areas where the need
for Kingdom publishers is greater. Granted, they cope
with hardship, but this fades in comparison with the
1 Perhaps the Jews were forbidden to have a synagogue in the city
because of Philippi’s military character. Or the city might have
lacked ten Jewish males—the minimum number required for establishing a synagogue.
2 See the box “Lydia—The Seller of Purple,” on page 252.

9. How have many today imitated Paul’s example, resulting in what
blessings?
250

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

satisfaction they feel as they ?nd people like Lydia, who
embrace Bible truths. Could you make adjustments that
would enable you to “step over” into a territory where
the need is greater? Blessings await you. For example,
consider Aaron, a brother in his 20’s who moved to a
Central American country. He echoes the sentiments
of many when he says: “Serving abroad has helped me
to grow spiritually and to draw closer to Jehovah. And
?eld service is great—I’m conducting eight Bible studies!”

10

“The Crowd Rose Up . . . Against Them”
(Acts 16:16-24)
Satan was surely furious that the good news had

gained a foothold in a part of the world where he and
his demons may have been unchallenged. No wonder,
then, that demonic activity was involved in causing
a turn of events for Paul and his companions! As
they continued visiting the place of prayer, a demonpossessed servant girl, who earned money for her masters by making predictions, kept following Paul’s party, shouting: “These men are slaves of the Most High
10. How was demon activity involved in causing a turn of events for Paul
and his companions?
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

251

LYDIA—THE SELLER OF PURPLE



Lydia lived in Philippi, a prominent city in Macedonia. She was originally from Thyatira, a city in the
region called Lydia in western Asia Minor. To ply
her trade as a seller of purple, Lydia had moved
across the Aegean Sea. She likely traded in purple
goods of various kinds—rugs, tapestries, fabrics,
and even dyes. An inscription found in Philippi testi?es to the presence of a guild of sellers of purple
in that city.
Lydia is described as “a worshiper of God,” likely
meaning that she was a proselyte to Judaism. (Acts
16:14) She may have become acquainted with the
worship of Jehovah in her home city. In contrast
with Philippi, it hosted a Jewish meeting place.
Some believe that Lydia was a nickname—meaning
“Lydian Woman”—given to her in Philippi. However, there is documentary evidence to show that
Lydia was also in use as a proper name.
The Lydians and their neighbors were famed for
their skill in the dyeing of purple since the days
of Homer, in the ninth or eighth century B.C.E.
Indeed, Thyatira’s water was reputed to produce “the brightest and the most permanent hues.”
Purple materials were luxury items, accessible
only to the rich. Although di?erent sources for pur252

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ple dye were known, the best and most expensive
—used for treating ?ne linen—came from Mediterranean shell?sh. A single drop of dye could be extracted from each mollusk, and some 8,000 shell?sh
had to be processed to obtain just one gram of the
precious liquid; thus, cloth of that color was very
costly.
Since Lydia’s trade required substantial capital
and she had a large house capable of hosting four
men—Paul, Silas, Timothy, and Luke—in all likelihood she was a successful and wealthy merchant.
The reference to her “household” could mean that
she lived with relatives, but it may also imply that
she had slaves and servants. (Acts 16:15) And the
fact that before leaving the city, Paul and Silas
met with some brothers in this hospitable woman’s
home suggests that it became a meeting place for
the ?rst Christians in Philippi.—Acts 16:40.
When Paul wrote to the Philippian congregation
some ten years later, he made no mention of Lydia.
So the details contained in Acts chapter 16 are all
we know about her.

God, who are publishing to you the way of salvation.”
The demon may have made the girl cry out these
words to make it appear that her predictions and Paul’s
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

253

teachings came from the same source. In that way, onlookers’ attention could be distracted from Christ’s
true followers. But Paul silenced the girl by expelling
the demon.—Acts 16:16-18.
11

When the owners of the slave girl found out

that their source of easy income had vanished, they
were enraged. They dragged Paul and Silas into the
marketplace, where magistrates—o?cials representing
Rome—held court. The owners appealed to the judges’
prejudice and patriotism, saying, in e?ect: ‘These Jews
are causing a disturbance by teaching customs that we
Romans cannot accept.’ Their words had immediate results. “The crowd [in the marketplace] rose up together against them [Paul and Silas],” and the magistrates
gave the order “to beat them with rods.” After that,
Paul and Silas were dragged to prison. The jailer threw
the injured men into the inner prison and locked their
feet in stocks. (Acts 16:19-24) When the jailer shut the
door, the darkness in that prison hole was so thick that
Paul and Silas could no doubt hardly see each other.
Yet, Jehovah was watching.—Ps. 139:12.
11. After the demon was expelled from the girl, what happened to Paul
and Silas?
254

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Years earlier, Jesus told his followers: “They will
persecute you.” (John 15:20) Thus, when Paul’s party
stepped over into Macedonia, they were prepared to
face opposition. When persecution struck, they viewed
it, not as a sign of Jehovah’s disapproval, but as an expression of Satan’s anger. Today, Satan’s agents still
employ methods similar to those used in Philippi. Deceitful opposers misrepresent us at school and in the
workplace, fueling opposition. In some lands, religious
opposers accuse us in court, saying, in e?ect: ‘These
Witnesses cause a disturbance by teaching customs
that we “traditional believers” cannot accept.’ In some
places, our fellow worshippers are beaten and thrown
into prison. Yet, Jehovah is watching.—1 Pet. 3:12.
12

“Baptized Without Delay” (Acts 16:25-34)
13 Paul and Silas must have needed some time to absorb the tumultuous events of that day. By midnight,
however, they had recovered from their beating to the
point that they “were praying and praising God with
song.” Then, suddenly, an earthquake shook the prison! The jailer awoke, saw that the doors were opened,
12. (a) How did Christ’s disciples view persecution, and why? (b) What
forms of opposition are still used by Satan and his agents?
13. What caused the jailer to ask: “What must I do to get saved?”
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

255

and feared that the prisoners had run away. Knowing
that he would be punished for letting them escape, he
“drew his sword and was about to do away with himself.” But Paul cried out: “Do not hurt yourself, for we
are all here!” The distressed jailer asked: “Sirs, what
must I do to get saved?” Paul and Silas could not save
him; only Jesus could. So they answered: “Believe on
the Lord Jesus and you will get saved.”—Acts 16:25-31.
14

Was the jailer’s question heartfelt? Paul did not

doubt the man’s sincerity. The jailer was a Gentile, unfamiliar with the Scriptures. Before he could become a
Christian, he needed to learn and accept basic Scriptural truths. So Paul and Silas took time to speak “the
word of Jehovah to him.” While engrossed in teaching
the Scriptures, the men perhaps forgot how they ached
from the blows they had received. The jailer, though,
noticed the deep cuts on their backs, and he cleansed
their wounds. Then he and his household “were baptized without delay.” What a blessing Paul and Silas received for meeting persecution with joy!—Acts
16:32-34.
14. (a) What help did Paul and Silas give the jailer? (b) What blessing
did Paul and Silas receive for meeting persecution with joy?
256

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Like Paul and Silas, many Witnesses today have
preached the good news while imprisoned for their
faith, with ?ne results. For example, in one land where
our activities were banned, at one time 40 percent of all
Witnesses living there had learned the truth about Jehovah while in prison! (Isa. 54:17) Note, too, that the
jailer asked for help only after the earthquake struck.
Similarly, some individuals today who have never responded to the Kingdom message may do so after their
personal world is suddenly shaken by a distressing
event. By faithfully visiting and revisiting those living
in our territory, we make sure that we are available to
help them.
15

“Are They Now Throwing Us Out S ecretly?”
(Acts 16:35-40)
16 The morning after the ?ogging, the magistrates ordered the release of Paul and Silas. But Paul said: “They
?ogged us publicly uncondemned, men who are Romans, and threw us into prison; and are they now throwing us out secretly? No, indeed! but let them come
15. (a) How have numerous Witnesses today followed the example of
Paul and Silas? (b) Why should we continue to revisit the homes of those
living in our territory?
16. On the day after Paul and Silas were ?ogged, how were the tables
turned?
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

257

themselves and bring us out.” Upon learning that the
two men were Roman citizens, the magistrates “grew
fearful,” for they had violated the men’s rights.1 The
tables were turned. The disciples had been beaten publicly; now the magistrates had to apologize publicly.
They entreated Paul and Silas to leave Philippi. The
two disciples complied, but ?rst they took time to encourage the growing group of new disciples. Only then
did they depart.
If their rights as Roman citizens had been respected earlier, Paul and Silas might well have been spared
the ?ogging. (Acts 22:25, 26) However, that could have
given the disciples in Philippi the impression that the
men had used their position to exempt themselves from
su?ering for Christ’s sake. How would that have a?ected the faith of disciples who were not Roman citizens?
After all, the law would not shield them from ?oggings.
Hence, by enduring punishment, Paul and his companion showed the new believers by example that followers of Christ are able to stand ?rm under persecution.
17

1 Roman law stated that a citizen was always entitled to a proper
trial and was never to be punished in public uncondemned.

17. What important lesson would the new disciples have learned by observing the endurance of Paul and Silas?
258

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

In addition, by demanding that their citizenship be recognized, Paul and Silas forced the magistrates to go on
public record as having acted unlawfully. That, in turn,
might hold them back from mistreating Paul’s fellow
believers and provide a measure of legal protection
from similar attacks in the future.
18

Today, overseers in the Christian congregation also

lead by example. Whatever they expect their fellow believers to do, Christian shepherds are willing to do. Similarly, like Paul, we weigh carefully how and when to
use our legal rights to obtain protection. If needed, we
appeal to local, national, and even international judicial courts to gain legal protection to carry out our worship. Our objective is, not social reform, but “the defending and legally establishing of the good news,” as
Paul wrote to the congregation in Philippi some ten
years after his imprisonment there. (Phil. 1:7) Still, no
matter what the outcome of such court cases may be,
like Paul and his companions, we are determined to
continue “to declare the good news” wherever God’s
spirit may lead us.—Acts 16:10.
18. (a) How do Christian overseers today imitate Paul’s example?
(b) How do we ‘defend and legally establish the good news’ in our day?
“STEP OVER INTO MACEDONIA”

259

CHAPTER 17



“He Reasoned With Them
From the Scriptures”
The basis of e?ective teaching;
the Beroeans’ ?ne example
Based on Acts 17:1-15

THE well-traveled road, built by skilled Roman engineers, cuts through the rugged mountains. Sounds
along that road occasionally mingle—the braying of
donkeys, the clatter of chariot wheels on thick ?agstone, and the clamor of travelers of all sorts, likely
including soldiers, merchants, and craftsmen. Three
companions—Paul, Silas, and Timothy—are traveling
more than 80 miles along this road, from Philippi to
Thessalonica. The journey is far from easy, particularly for Paul and Silas. They are nursing the wounds they
received in Philippi, where they were beaten with
rods.—Acts 16:22, 23.
2

How do these men keep their minds o? the long

1, 2. Who are journeying from Philippi to Thessalonica, and what might
be on their minds?
260

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

miles that lie ahead? Conversation surely helps. Still
fresh in their minds is the thrilling experience they
had when that jailer back in Philippi and his family
became believers. That experience has made these
travelers even more determined to continue proclaiming the word of God. However, as they approach the
coastal city of Thessalonica, they may wonder how the
Jews in that city will treat them. Will they be attacked,
even beaten, as they were in Philippi?
3

Paul later made his feelings known in a letter he

wrote to Christians in Thessalonica: “After we had
?rst su?ered and been insolently treated (just as you
know) in Philippi, we mustered up boldness by means
of our God to speak to you the good news of God with
a great deal of struggling.” (1 Thess. 2:2) Paul thus
seems to suggest that he had misgivings about entering the city of Thessalonica, particularly after what
happened in Philippi. Can you empathize with Paul?
Do you ever ?nd it a struggle to proclaim the good
news? Paul relied on Jehovah to strengthen him, to
help him muster up the boldness he needed. Studying
3. How can Paul’s example in mustering up boldness to preach be useful to us today?
“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

261

Paul’s example can help you to do the same.—1 Cor.
4:16.
“He Reasoned . . . From the S criptures” (Acts 17:1-3)
4 The account tells us that while in Thessalonica,
Paul preached in the synagogue for three Sabbaths.
Does this mean that his visit to the city lasted just
three weeks? Not necessarily. We do not know how
soon after his arrival Paul ?rst went to the synagogue.
Further, Paul’s letters disclose that while in Thessalonica, he and his companions worked to support themselves. (1 Thess. 2:9; 2 Thess. 3:7, 8) Also, during his
stay, Paul twice received provisions from the brothers
in Philippi. (Phil. 4:16) So his stay in Thessalonica was
likely somewhat longer than three weeks.
5

Having mustered up boldness to preach, Paul

spoke to those assembled in the synagogue. According
to his custom, “he reasoned with them from the Scriptures, explaining and proving by references that it was
necessary for the Christ to su?er and to rise from the
dead, and saying: ‘This is the Christ, this Jesus whom
4. Why is it likely that Paul spent more than three weeks in Thessalonica?
5. In what way did Paul seek to appeal to people?
262

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

I am publishing to you.’ ” (Acts 17:2, 3) Note that Paul
did not seek to stir up the emotions of his listeners; he
appealed to their minds. He knew that those who attended the synagogue were familiar with and respected the Scriptures. What they lacked was understanding. Paul therefore reasoned, explained, and proved
from the Scriptures that Jesus of Nazareth was the
promised Messiah, or Christ.
6

Paul followed the standard set by Jesus, who used

the Scriptures as the basis for his teaching. During his
public ministry, for example, Jesus told his followers
that according to the Scriptures, the Son of man must
su?er, die, and be raised from the dead. (Matt. 16:21)
After his resurrection, Jesus appeared to his disciples.
Surely that alone would show that he had spoken the
truth. Yet, Jesus gave them more. Concerning what he
said to certain disciples, we read: “Commencing at
Moses and all the Prophets he interpreted to them
things pertaining to himself in all the Scriptures.”
With what result? The disciples exclaimed: “Were not
our hearts burning as he was speaking to us on the
6. How did Jesus reason from the Scriptures, and with what result?
“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

263

road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”
—Luke 24:13, 27, 32.
7

The message of God’s Word has power. (Heb. 4:12)

Christians today thus base their teachings on that
Word, as did Jesus, Paul, and the other apostles. We
too reason with people, explain what the Scriptures
mean, and provide proof of what we teach by opening
the Bible to show householders what it says. After all,
the message we bring is not ours. By using the Bible
liberally, we help people to discern that we proclaim,
not our own ideas, but the teachings of God. Additionally, we do well to keep in mind that the message we
preach is solidly founded on God’s Word. It is completely reliable. Does knowing that not give you con?dence to share the message boldly, as Paul did?
8

“S ome . . . B ecame B elievers” (Acts 17:4-9)
Paul had already experienced the truthfulness of

Jesus’ words: “A slave is not greater than his master.
If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you
7. Why is it important to base our teaching on the Scriptures?
8-10. (a) In what ways did people in Thessalonica respond to the good
news? (b) Why were some of the Jews jealous of Paul? (c) How did the
Jewish opposers act?
264

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

also; if they have observed my word, they will observe
yours also.” (John 15:20) In Thessalonica, Paul met
just such a mixed response—some were eager to observe the word, while others resisted it. Concerning
those who reacted favorably, Luke writes: “Some of
them [the Jews] became believers [Christians] and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and a great
multitude of the Greeks who worshiped God and not
a few of the principal women did so.” (Acts 17:4) Surely these new disciples rejoiced to have the Scriptures
opened to their understanding.
9

Though some appreciated Paul’s words, others

gnashed their teeth at him. Some of the Jews in Thessalonica were jealous of Paul’s success at winning over
“a great multitude of the Greeks.” Those Jews, intent on making Jewish proselytes, had instructed the
Greek Gentiles in the teachings of the Hebrew Scriptures and looked upon those Greeks as belonging to
them. Suddenly, though, it seemed that Paul was stealing these Greeks away, and right at the synagogue! The
Jews were furious.
10

Luke tells us what happened next: “The Jews,

“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

265

getting jealous, took into their company certain wicked men of the marketplace idlers and formed a mob
and proceeded to throw the city into an uproar. And
they assaulted the house of Jason and went seeking to
have [Paul and Silas] brought forth to the rabble.
When they did not ?nd them they dragged Jason and
certain brothers to the city rulers, crying out: ‘These
men that have overturned the inhabited earth are
present here also, and Jason has received them with
hospitality. And all these men act in opposition to the
decrees of Caesar, saying there is another king, Jesus.’ ” (Acts 17:5-7) How would this mob action a?ect
Paul and his companions?
11

A mob is an ugly thing. It rushes with the fury of

a swollen river—violent and uncontrolled. This was
the weapon that the Jews employed to try to rid themselves of Paul and Silas. Then, after the Jews had
thrown the city “into an uproar,” they tried to convince the rulers that the charges were weighty. The
?rst charge was that Paul and his fellow Kingdom pro11. What charges were brought against Paul and his fellow Kingdom proclaimers, and what decree might the accusers have had in mind? (See
footnote.)
266

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

claimers had “overturned the inhabited earth,” though
Paul and his companions had not caused the uproar
in Thessalonica! The second charge was far more serious. The Jews argued that the missionaries proclaimed another King, Jesus, thereby violating the decrees of the emperor.1
12

Recall that the religious leaders brought a similar

charge against Jesus. To Pilate they said: “This man
we found subverting our nation . . . and saying he himself is Christ a king.” (Luke 23:2) Possibly fearing that
the emperor might conclude that Pilate condoned
high treason, he sent Jesus to His death. Similarly,
the charges against the Christians in Thessalonica
could have brought serious consequences. One reference work states: “It is hard to exaggerate the danger
to which this exposed them, for ‘the very suggestion
of treason against the Emperors often proved fatal to
1 According to one scholar, there was at that time a decree of Caesar forbidding the making of any prediction “of the coming of a new
king or kingdom, especially one that might be said to supplant or
judge the existing emperor.” Paul’s enemies might well have misrepresented the apostle’s message as a violation of such a decree. See
the box “The Caesars and the Book of Acts,” on page 268.

12. What shows that the charges against Christians in Thessalonica
could have brought serious consequences?
“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

267

THE CAESARS AND THE B O OK OF ACTS



All of the events recorded in the book of Acts
—and for that matter, in the entire Christian Greek
Scriptures—take place within the borders of the Roman Empire. Thus, the supreme secular authority
was always the Roman emperor. He was the one to
whom the Thessalonian Jews referred when they
spoke of “the decrees of Caesar.” (Acts 17:7) Four
emperors ruled during the period covered by Acts
—Tiberius, Gaius, Claudius I, and Nero.
? Tiberius (14-37 C.E.) was emperor during all of
Jesus’ ministry and during the ?rst few years of the
existence of the Christian congregation. At Jesus’
trial, it was to Tiberius that the Jews were referring
when they shouted: “If you [Pilate] release this man,
you are not a friend of Caesar. . . . We have no king
but Caesar.”—John 19:12, 15.
? Gaius, also known as Caligula (37-41 C.E.), is not
mentioned in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
? Claudius I (41-54 C.E.) is named twice in the book of
Acts. As foretold by the Christian prophet Agabus,
“a great famine,” dated about 46 C.E., came “upon
the entire inhabited earth . . . in the time
of Claudius.” Moreover, in 49 or early 50 C.E.,
Claudius “ordered all the Jews to depart from
Rome,” a decree that prompted Aquila and Priscilla
to move to Corinth, where they met the apostle
Paul.—Acts 11:28; 18:1, 2.
268

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

?

Nero (54-68 C.E.) was the Caesar to whom Paul
appealed. (Acts 25:11) It is said that this
emperor later blamed the Christians for the ?re
that destroyed much of Rome in about 64 C.E.
Soon thereafter, in about 65 C.E., the apostle Paul
suffered his second imprisonment in Rome and was
executed.

the accused.’ ” Would this hateful attack prove successful?
13 The mob failed to put a stop to the preaching
work in Thessalonica. Why? For one thing, Paul
and Silas could not be found. Furthermore, the city
rulers were evidently not convinced of the truthfulness of the charges. After requiring “su?cient security,” perhaps in the form of bail, they released Jason and the other brothers who had been brought
before them. (Acts 17:8, 9) Following Jesus’ counsel
to be “cautious as serpents and yet innocent as
doves,” Paul prudently kept out of harm’s way so
that he could continue preaching elsewhere. (Matt.
10:16) Clearly, the boldness that Paul mustered
13, 14. (a) Why did the mob fail in its attack? (b) How did Paul demonstrate Christlike caution, and how can we imitate his example?
“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

269

up did not mean recklessness. How can Christians
today follow his example?
14 In modern times, the clergy of Christendom have
often incited mobs against Jehovah’s Witnesses. With
cries of sedition and treason, they have manipulated
rulers to act against the Witnesses. Like those ?rstcentury persecutors, modern-day opposers are driven
by jealousy. At any rate, true Christians do not court
trouble. We avoid confrontations with such angry, unreasonable people whenever possible, seeking rather
to continue our work in peace, perhaps returning later when things have calmed down.

15

They Were “More Noble-Minded”
(Acts 17:10-15)
For safety’s sake, Paul and Silas were sent to Be-

roea, about 40 miles away. Upon arriving there, Paul
went to the synagogue and spoke to those assembled.
What a delight to ?nd a receptive audience! Luke
wrote that the Jews of Beroea were “more nobleminded than those in Thessalonica, for they received
the word with the greatest eagerness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily as to whether these
15. How did the B eroeans respond to the good news?
270

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

things were so.” (Acts 17:10, 11) Did those words re?ect unfavorably on the ones in Thessalonica who had
embraced the truth? Not at all. Paul later wrote to
them: “We also thank God incessantly, because when
you received God’s word, which you heard from us,
you accepted it, not as the word of men, but, just as
it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at
work in you believers.” (1 Thess. 2:13) What, though,
made those Jews in Beroea so noble-minded?
16

Though the Beroeans were hearing something

new, they were not suspicious or harshly critical; neither were they gullible. First, they listened carefully to
what Paul had to say. Then, they veri?ed what they
had learned by turning to the Scriptures, which Paul
had opened up to their understanding. Moreover, they
diligently studied the Word of God, not just on the
Sabbath, but daily. And they did so with great “eagerness of mind,” devoting themselves to ?nding out what
the Scriptures revealed in light of this new teaching.
Then, they proved humble enough to make changes,
for “many of them became believers.” (Acts 17:12) No
wonder Luke describes them as “noble-minded”!
16. Why are the B eroeans ?ttingly described as “noble-minded”?
“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

271

17

Little did those Beroeans realize that the record

of their reaction to the good news would be preserved
in God’s Word as a shining example of spiritual noblemindedness. They did precisely what Paul had hoped
they would do and what Jehovah God wanted them to
do. Likewise, it is what we encourage people to do—to
examine the Bible carefully so that their faith is solidly based on God’s Word. After we become believers,
though, does the need to be noble-minded come to an
end? On the contrary, it becomes ever more important
that we be eager to learn from Jehovah and quick to
apply his teachings. In that way, we allow Jehovah to
mold us and train us according to his will. (Isa. 64:8)
We thus remain useful and fully pleasing to our heavenly Father.
18

Paul did not stay in Beroea for long. We read:

“When the Jews from Thessalonica learned that the
word of God was published also in Beroea by Paul,
17. Why is the example of the B eroeans so commendable, and how can
we continue to imitate it long after becoming believers?
18, 19. (a) Why did Paul leave B eroea, yet how did he show perseverance that is worthy of imitation? (b) Whom was Paul to address next,
and where?
272

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

they came there also to incite and agitate the masses.
Then the brothers immediately sent Paul o? to go
as far as the sea; but both Silas and Timothy remained behind there. However, those conducting Paul
brought him as far as Athens and, after receiving a
command for Silas and Timothy to come to him as
quickly as possible, they departed.” (Acts 17:13-15)
How persistent those enemies of the good news were!
It was not enough to chase Paul out of Thessalonica;
they traveled to Beroea and tried to stir up the same
sort of trouble there—all to no avail. Paul knew that
his territory was vast; he simply moved on to preach
elsewhere. May we today prove equally determined to
frustrate the e?orts of those who want to stop the
preaching work!
19

Having borne thorough witness to the Jews in

Thessalonica and Beroea, Paul had surely learned
much about the importance of witnessing with boldness and reasoning from the Scriptures. We have too.
Now, though, Paul was to face a di?erent audience
—the Gentiles of Athens. How would he fare in that
city? In the next chapter, we will see.
“HE REASONED WITH THEM FROM THE SCRIPTURES”

273

CHAPTER 18



“Seek God, . . . and
Really Find Him”
Paul establishes common ground
and adapts to his audience
Based on Acts 17:16-34

PAUL is greatly disturbed. He is in Athens, Greece,
the center of learning where Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle once taught. Athens is a most religious city. All
around him—in temples, in public squares, and on the
streets—Paul sees an array of idols, for Athenians
worship a pantheon of gods. Paul knows how Jehovah,
the true God, views idolatry. (Ex. 20:4, 5) The faithful
apostle shares Jehovah’s view—he abhors idols!
2

What Paul sees up on entering the agora, or

marketplace, is especially shocking. A large number of
phallic statues of the god Hermes line the northwest
corner, near the principal entrance. The marketplace
is ?lled with shrines. How will the zealous apostle
1-3. (a) Why is the apostle Paul greatly disturbed in Athens? (b) What
can we learn by studying Paul’s example?
274

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

preach in this deeply idolatrous climate? Will he control his emotions and ?nd common ground with his
audience? Will he succeed in helping any to seek the
true God and really ?nd Him?
3

Paul’s speech to the learned men of Athens, as re-

corded at Acts 17:22-31, is a model of eloquence, tact,
and discernment. By studying Paul’s example, we can
learn much about how to establish common ground,
helping our listeners to reason.
4

Teaching “in the Marketplace” (Acts 17:16-21)
Paul visited Athens on his second missionary jour-

ney, in about 50 C.E.1 While waiting for Silas and Timothy to arrive from Beroea, Paul “began to reason in
the synagogue with the Jews,” as was his custom.
He also sought out a territory where he could reach
Athens’ non-Jewish citizens—“in the marketplace,” or
agora. (Acts 17:17) Located northwest of the Acropolis, Athens’ agora covered 12 acres or so. The marketplace was much more than a location for buying and
1 See the box “Athens—Cultural Capital of the Ancient World,” on
page 276.

4, 5. Where did Paul preach in Athens, and what challenging audience
awaited him?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

275

ATHENS—CULTURAL CAPITAL OF THE
ANCIENT WORLD

The Acropolis of Athens was a strongly forti?ed
citadel well before the city’s history began to be recorded in the seventh century B.C.E. Athens became the chief city of the district of Attica and dominated an area of some 1,000 square miles, bounded
by mountains and sea. The city’s name seems to be
related to that of its patron goddess, Athena.
In the sixth century B.C.E., an Athenian legislator
named Solon reformed the social, political, juridical, and economic structures of the city. He improved the lot of the poor and laid the basis for a
democratic form of government. It was a democracy only for the free, however, and a large part of the
city’s population was made up of slaves.
Following Greek victories over the Persians in the
?fth century B.C.E., Athens became the capital of a
small empire that extended its maritime trade from
Italy and Sicily in the west to Cyprus and Syria in
the east. At the height of its splendor, Athens was
the cultural center of the ancient world, excelling in
art, drama, philosophy, rhetoric, and science. Many
public buildings and temples adorned the city. Its
skyline was dominated by the Acropolis, a com276

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

manding hill on which stood the Parthenon and its
40-foot gold and ivory statue of Athena.
Athens was conquered ?rst by the Spartans, then
by the Macedonians, and ?nally by the Romans,
who stripped the city of its wealth. Even so, in the
time of the apostle Paul, Athens still enjoyed a privileged status because of its illustrious past. In fact,
the city was never incorporated into any Roman
province but was granted juridical authority over
its own citizens and exemption from Roman taxes.
Though its greatest glories were gone, Athens remained a university city, where the sons of the
wealthy were sent to study.

selling; it was the city’s public square. One reference
work notes that this place was “the economic, political and cultural heart of the city.” Athenians delighted to convene there and engage in intellectual discussion.
5

Paul faced a challenging audience at the market-

place. Among his listeners were Epicureans and
Stoics, members of rival schools of philosophy.1 The
Epicureans believed that life came into existence
1 See the box “Epicureans and Stoics,” on page 278.
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

277

EPICUREANS AND STOICS



The Epicureans and Stoics were followers of two
separate schools of philosophy. Neither believed in
a resurrection.
The Epicureans believed in the existence of gods
but thought that the gods had no interest in men and
would neither reward nor punish them, so prayer or
sacri?ce was useless. Epicureans held pleasure to be
the supreme good in life. Their thinking and actions were devoid of moral principle. Moderation
was urged, however, on the grounds that it prevented the negative consequences of overindulgence.
Knowledge was sought only to rid a person of religious fears and superstition.
The Stoics, on the other hand, believed that all
things were part of an impersonal deity and that the
human soul emanated from such a source. Some
Stoics held that the soul would eventually be destroyed along with the universe. Other Stoics believed that the soul would ultimately be reabsorbed
by this deity. According to Stoic philosophers, happiness was to be obtained by following nature.

by accident. Their view of life was summed up as follows: “Nothing to fear in God; Nothing to feel in
death; Good can be achieved; Evil can be endured.”
278

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

The Stoics stressed reason and logic and did not believe God to be a Person. Neither the Epicureans nor
the Stoics believed in the resurrection as taught by
Christ’s disciples. Clearly, the philosophical views of
these two groups were incompatible with the elevated
truths of genuine Christianity, which Paul was preaching.
6

How did the Greek intellectuals react to Paul’s

teaching? Some used a word that means “chatterer,” or
“seed picker.” (Acts 17:18; ftn.) Regarding this Greek
term, one scholar states: “The word was originally
used of a small bird that went around picking up
grain, and later was applied to persons who picked up
food scraps and other odds and ends in the market
place. Still later it came to be used ?guratively of any
person who picked up odd bits of information, and especially of one who was unable to put them together properly.” In e?ect, those learned men were saying
that Paul was an ignorant plagiarist. Yet, as we will
see, Paul was not intimidated by such name-calling.
6, 7. How did some of the Greek intellectuals react to Paul’s teaching,
and what similar reaction may we encounter today?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

279

7

It is no di?erent today. As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we

have often been the target of name-calling because of
our Bible-based beliefs. For example, some educators
teach that evolution is a fact and insist that if you are
intelligent, you must accept it. They, in e?ect, label
as ignorant those who refuse to believe in it. Such
learned men would have people think that we are ‘seed
pickers’ when we present what the Bible says and
point to the evidence of design in nature. But we are
not intimidated. On the contrary, we speak with con?dence when defending our belief that life on earth is
the product of an intelligent Designer, Jehovah God.
—Rev. 4:11.
8

Others who heard Paul’s preaching in the market-

place had a di?erent reaction. “He seems to be a publisher of foreign deities,” they concluded. (Acts 17:18)
Was Paul really introducing new gods to the Athenians? This was a serious matter, echoing one of the
charges for which Socrates had been tried and condemned to death centuries earlier. Not surprisingly,
8. (a) Some who heard Paul’s preaching had what reaction? (b) What
might it mean that Paul was led to the Areopagus? (See footnote on
page 281.)
280

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Paul was led to the Areopagus and asked to explain
the teachings that sounded strange to the Athenians.1
How would Paul defend his message to individuals
who had no background in the Scriptures?
9

“Men of Athens, I B ehold” (Acts 17:22, 23)
Recall that Paul was greatly disturbed by all the

idolatry he had seen. Rather than unleash an unbridled attack on idol worship, however, he maintained his composure. With the utmost tact, he endeavored to win over his audience by establishing
common ground. He began: “Men of Athens, I behold
that in all things you seem to be more given to the fear
of the deities than others are.” (Acts 17:22) In a sense,
Paul was saying, ‘I see that you are very religious.’
Wisely, Paul commended them for being religiously
inclined. He recognized that some who are blinded by
false beliefs may have receptive hearts. After all, Paul
1 Located northwest of the Acropolis, the Areopagus was the traditional meeting place of the chief council of Athens. The term
“Areopagus” may refer either to the council or to the actual hill.
Hence, there are di?erences of opinion among scholars as to whether Paul was brought to or near this hill or to a meeting of the council
elsewhere, perhaps in the agora.

9-11. (a) How did Paul endeavor to establish common ground with his
audience? (b) How can we imitate Paul’s example in our ministry?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

281

knew that he himself was once “ignorant and acted
with a lack of faith.”—1 Tim. 1:13.
10

Building on common ground, Paul mentioned that

he had observed tangible evidence of the Athenians’
religiousness—an altar dedicated “To an Unknown
God.” According to one source, “it was customary for
Greeks and others to dedicate altars to ‘unknown
gods,’ for fear that in their worship they had omitted some god who might otherwise be o?ended.” By
means of such an altar, the Athenians admitted the existence of a God who was unknown to them. Paul used
the presence of this altar to make a transition into the
good news that he was preaching. He explained: “What
you are unknowingly giving godly devotion to, this I
am publishing to you.” (Acts 17:23) Paul’s reasoning
was subtle but powerful. He was not preaching a new
or strange god, as some had charged. He was explaining the God that was unknown to them—the true
God.
11

How can we imitate Paul’s example in our minis-

try? If we are observant, we may see evidence that a
person is religiously devout, perhaps by noting some
282

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

religious item that he is wearing or that is displayed
on his home or in the yard. We might say: ‘I see that
you are a religious person. I was hoping to talk to
someone who is religiously inclined.’ By tactfully acknowledging the person’s religious feelings, we may
establish common ground on which to build. Remember that it is not our aim to prejudge others based on
their religious convictions. Among our fellow worshippers are many who at one time sincerely embraced
false religious beliefs.

12

God “Is Not Far O? From Each One of Us”
(Acts 17:24-28)
Paul had established common ground but could

he maintain it when giving a witness? Knowing that
his listeners were educated in Greek philosophy and
unfamiliar with the Scriptures, he adapted his approach in several ways. First, he presented Biblical
teachings without directly quoting from the Scriptures. Second, he identi?ed himself with his listeners,
at times using the words “us” and “we.” Third, he
quoted from Greek literature to show that certain
12. How did Paul adapt his approach to his listeners?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

283

things he was teaching were expressed in their own
writings. Let us now examine Paul’s powerful speech.
What important truths did he convey about the God
who was unknown to the Athenians?
13

God created the universe. Said Paul: “The God that

made the world and all the things in it, being, as this
One is, Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in
handmade temples.”1 (Acts 17:24) The universe did
not come about by accident. The true God is the Creator of all things. (Ps. 146:6) Unlike Athena or the other deities whose glory depended on temples, shrines,
and altars, the Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth
cannot be contained in temples built by human hands.
(1 Ki. 8:27) The implication of Paul’s words was clear:
The true God is grander than any man-made idols
found in man-made temples.—Isa. 40:18-26.
14

God is not dependent on humans. Idolaters were ac-

1 The Greek word rendered “world” is kosmos, which the Greeks
applied to the material universe. It is possible that Paul, who was
trying to maintain common ground with his Grecian audience, here
used the term in that sense.

13. What did Paul explain about the origin of the universe, and what
was the implication of his words?
14. How did Paul show that God is not dependent on humans?
284

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

customed to clothing their images with lavish garments, showering them with expensive gifts, or bringing them food and drink—as if the idols needed such
things! However, some of the Greek philosophers in
Paul’s audience may have believed that a god would
need nothing from humans. If so, they no doubt
agreed with Paul’s statement that God is not “attended to by human hands as if he needed anything.” Indeed, there is nothing material that humans can give
to the Creator! Rather, he gives humans what they
need—“life and breath and all things,” including the
sun, the rain, and fruitful soil. (Acts 17:25; Gen. 2:7)
So God, the Giver, is not dependent on humans, the
receivers.
15

God made man. The Athenians believed that they

were superior to non-Greeks. But pride of nationality
or race goes against Bible truth. (Deut. 10:17) Paul addressed this delicate matter with tact and skill. When
he said, “[God] made out of one man every nation of
15. How did Paul address the Athenians’ belief that they were superior
to non-Greeks, and what important lesson can we learn from his example?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

285

men,” Paul’s words no doubt gave his listeners pause.
(Acts 17:26) He was referring to the Genesis account
of Adam, the progenitor of the human race. (Gen. 1:
26-28) Since all humans have a common ancestor, no
race or nationality is superior to another. How could
any of Paul’s listeners miss the point? We learn an important lesson from his example. While we want to be
tactful and reasonable in our witnessing work, we do
not want to water down Bible truth so as to make it
more acceptable to others.
16

God purposed that humans be close to him. Even if

the philosophers in Paul’s audience had long debated
the purpose of human existence, they could never
have explained it satisfactorily. Paul, however, clearly
revealed the Creator’s purpose for humans, namely
“for them to seek God, if they might grope for him
and really ?nd him, although, in fact, he is not far o?
from each one of us.” (Acts 17:27) The God who
was unknown to the Athenians is by no means unknowable. On the contrary, he is not far o? from those
who truly want to ?nd him and learn about him. (Ps.
16. What is the Creator’s purpose for humans?
286

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

145:18) Notice that Paul used the term “us,” thus including himself among those who needed “to seek”
and “grope for” God.
17

Humans should feel drawn to God. Because of Him,

Paul said, “we have life and move and exist.” Some
scholars say that Paul was alluding to the words of
Epimenides, a Cretan poet of the sixth century B.C.E.
and “a ?gure signi?cant in Athenian religious tradition.” Paul gave another reason why humans should
feel drawn to God: “Certain ones of the poets among
you have said, ‘For we are also his progeny.’ ” (Acts 17:
28) Humans should feel a kinship with God; he created the one man from whom all humans descend. To
appeal to his audience, Paul wisely quoted directly
from Greek writings that his listeners no doubt respected.1 In harmony with Paul’s example, we may at
times make limited use of quotations from secular
history, encyclopedias, or other accepted reference
1 Paul quoted from the astronomical poem Phaenomena, by the
Stoic poet Aratus. Similar words are found in other Greek writings,
including Hymn to Zeus, by the Stoic writer Cleanthes.

17, 18. Why should humans feel drawn to God, and what can we learn
from the way Paul appealed to his audience?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

287

works. For example, an appropriate quote from a respected source might help to convince a non-Witness
about the origin of certain false religious practices or
observances.
18

Up to this point in his speech, Paul conveyed key

truths about God, skillfully tailoring his words to his
audience. What did the apostle want his Athenian listeners to do with this vital information? Without delay, he went on to tell them as he continued his speech.
“They Should All Everywhere Repent” (Acts 17:29-31)
19 Paul was ready to exhort his listeners to act. Referring back to the quote from Greek writings, he said:
“Seeing, therefore, that we are the progeny of God, we
ought not to imagine that the Divine Being is like gold
or silver or stone, like something sculptured by the art
and contrivance of man.” (Acts 17:29) Indeed, if humans are a product of God, then how could God take
the form of idols, which are a product of men? Paul’s
tactful reasoning exposed the folly of worshipping
man-made idols. (Ps. 115:4-8; Isa. 44:9-20) By saying
19, 20. (a) How did Paul tactfully expose the folly of worshipping manmade idols? (b) What action did Paul’s listeners need to take?
288

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“we ought not to . . . ,” Paul no doubt removed some
of the sting from his rebuke.
20

The apostle made it clear that action was needed:

“God has overlooked the times of such ignorance [of
imagining that God could be pleased with humans
who worshipped idols], yet now he is telling mankind
that they should all everywhere repent.” (Acts 17:30)
Some of Paul’s listeners might have been shocked to
hear this call for repentance. But his powerful speech
plainly showed that they owed their life to God and
were thus accountable to Him. They needed to seek
God, learn the truth about him, and bring their whole
way of life into harmony with that truth. For the Athenians, that meant recognizing and turning away from
the sin of idolatry.
21

Paul ended his speech with forceful words: “[God]

has set a day in which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and he has furnished a guarantee to all men
in that he has resurrected him from the dead.” (Acts
21, 22. Paul ended his speech with what forceful words, and what meaning do his words have for us today?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

289

17:31) A coming Judgment Day—what a sobering reason to seek and ?nd the true God! Paul did not name
the appointed Judge. Rather, Paul said something startling about this Judge: He had lived as a man, died,
and been raised from the dead by God!
22

That rousing conclusion is ?lled with meaning for

us today. We know that the Judge appointed by God
is the resurrected Jesus Christ. (John 5:22) We also
know that Judgment Day will be a thousand years long
and is fast approaching. (Rev. 20:4, 6) We do not fear
Judgment Day, for we understand that it will bring untold blessings to those judged faithful. The ful?llment
of our hope for a glorious future is guaranteed by the
greatest of miracles—the resurrection of Jesus Christ!
23

“S ome . . . B ecame B elievers” (Acts 17:32-34)
There were mixed reactions to Paul’s speech.

“Some began to mock” when they heard of a resurrection. Others were polite but noncommittal, saying:
“We will hear you about this even another time.” (Acts
17:32) A few, however, responded positively: “Some
men joined themselves to him and became believers,
23. What were the mixed reactions to Paul’s speech?
290

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

among whom also were Dionysius, a judge of the court
of the Areopagus, and a woman named Damaris, and
others besides them.” (Acts 17:34) We experience similar reactions in our ministry. Some people may deride
us, while others respond with polite indi?erence. However, we are thrilled when some accept the Kingdom
message and become believers.
24

As we re?ect on Paul’s speech, we can learn much

about logical development and convincing argumentation as well as how to adapt to our audience. In addition, we can learn about the need to be patient and
tactful with those who are blinded by false religious
beliefs. We can also learn this important lesson: We
must never compromise Bible truth just to appease
our listeners. Yet, by imitating the example of the
apostle Paul, we can become more e?ective teachers in the ?eld ministry. Furthermore, overseers can
thereby become better quali?ed teachers in the congregation. We will thus be well-equipped to help others to “seek God . . . and really ?nd him.”—Acts 17:27.
24. What can we learn from the speech that Paul gave as he stood in the
midst of the Areopagus?
“SEEK GOD, . . . AND REALLY FIND HIM”

291

CHAPTER 19



“Keep On Speaking and
Do Not Keep Silent”
Paul supports himself yet
puts his ministry ?rst
Based on Acts 18:1-22

IT IS the latter part of 50 C.E. The apostle Paul is in
Corinth, a wealthy trade center that hosts a large population of Greeks, Romans, and Jews.1 Paul has not
come here to buy or sell goods or to look for secular
work. He has come to Corinth for a far more important reason—to bear witness about God’s Kingdom.
Still, Paul needs a place to stay, and he is determined
not to be a ?nancial burden on others. He does not
want to give anyone the impression that he is living o?
the word of God. What will he do?
2

Paul knows a trade—tentmaking. Making tents is

not easy, but he is willing to work with his hands to
support himself. Will he ?nd employment here in this
1 See the box “Corinth—Master of Two Seas,” on page 294.

1-3. Why has the apostle Paul come to Corinth, and what challenges does
he face?
292

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

bustling city? Will he locate a suitable place to stay?
Although faced with these challenges, Paul does not
lose sight of his main work, the ministry.
3

As matters turned out, Paul stayed in Corinth for

some time, and his ministry there bore much fruit.
What can we learn from Paul’s activities in Corinth
that will help us to bear thorough witness about God’s
Kingdom in our territory?
4

“They Were Tentmakers by Trade” (Acts 18:1-4)
Some time after arriving in Corinth, Paul met a hos-

pitable couple—a natural Jew named Aquila and his
wife, Priscilla, or Prisca. The couple took up residence
in Corinth because of a decree by Emperor Claudius
ordering “all the Jews to depart from Rome.” (Acts 18:
1, 2) Aquila and Priscilla welcomed Paul not only into
their home but also into their business. We read: “On
account of being of the same trade [Paul] stayed at
their home, and they worked, for they were tentmakers
by trade.” (Acts 18:3) The home of this warmhearted
couple remained Paul’s place of dwelling during his
ministry in Corinth. While he was staying with Aquila
4, 5. (a) Where did Paul stay while in Corinth, and what secular work
did he do? (b) How may Paul have come to be a tentmaker?
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

293

CORINTH—MASTER OF TWO SEAS



Ancient Corinth lay on an isthmus between the
Greek mainland and the southern peninsula, the
Peloponnese. The isthmus was less than four miles
wide at its narrowest point, so Corinth had two
ports. On the Gulf of Corinth was Lechaeum, serving sea routes heading westward to Italy, Sicily, and
Spain. On the Saronic Gulf, Cenchreae served maritime tra?c to and from the Aegean region, Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt.
Since the capes at the southern extremity of the
Peloponnese were windswept and dangerous for
shipping, navigators often preferred to anchor at
one of Corinth’s two ports, have their cargo transported overland, and reload it at the other port.
Lightweight ships could even be hauled over the
isthmus on a platform that ran along a grooved
pavement from sea to sea. The city’s position thus
allowed it to dominate east-west maritime commerce and also north-south overland trade. Lively
commerce brought to Corinth not only wealth but
also vices common to many ports.
In the apostle Paul’s day, Corinth was the capital
of the Roman province of Achaia and an important
administrative center. The religious diversity of the
city is attested to by the presence of a temple for
294

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

the imperial cult, shrines and temples dedicated to
numerous Greek and Egyptian divinities, and a Jewish synagogue.—Acts 18:4.
The athletic competitions held every two years at
nearby Isthmia were second in importance only to
the Olympic Games. The apostle Paul would have
been in Corinth during the games of 51 C.E. Hence,
comments one Bible dictionary, “it can hardly be coincidental that his ?rst use of athletic imagery appears in a letter to Corinth.”—1 Cor. 9:24-27.

and Priscilla, Paul may have written some of the letters that later became part of the Bible canon.1
5

How is it that Paul, a man who had been educated

“at the feet of Gamaliel,” was also a tentmaker by
trade? (Acts 22:3) The Jews of the ?rst century apparently did not consider it beneath their dignity to teach
their children a trade, even though such children may
have received additional education as well. Having
come from Tarsus in Cilicia, the area famous for a
cloth named cilicium from which tents were made, Paul
likely learned the trade during his youth. What did
1 See the box “Inspired Letters That Provided Encouragement,” on
page 296.
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

295

INSPIRED LETTERS THAT PROVIDED
ENCOURAGEMENT

During his 18-month stay in Corinth, about 5052 C.E., the apostle Paul wrote at least two letters
that became part of the Christian Greek Scriptures
—First and Second Thessalonians. He wrote his letter to the Galatians either during the same period
or shortly afterward.
First Thessalonians is the earliest of Paul’s inspired
writings. Paul visited Thessalonica in about 50 C.E.,
during his second preaching tour. The congregation
that was formed there soon had to contend with opposition, which forced Paul and Silas to leave the
city. (Acts 17:1-10, 13) Concerned about the welfare
of the ?edgling congregation, Paul twice attempted
to return, but “Satan cut across [his] path.” Paul
therefore sent Timothy to comfort and strengthen
the brothers. Likely late in the year 50 C.E., Timothy
rejoined Paul in Corinth and brought a good report
about the Thessalonian congregation. Thereafter,
Paul penned this letter.—1 Thess. 2:17–3:7.
Second Thessalonians was probably written soon
after the ?rst letter, perhaps in 51 C.E. In both letters, Timothy and Silvanus (called Silas in Acts)
joined Paul in sending greetings, but we have no rec296

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ord of these three being together again after Paul’s
stay in Corinth. (Acts 18:5, 18; 1 Thess. 1:1; 2 Thess.
1:1) Why did Paul write this second letter? He had
apparently received more news about the congregation, perhaps via the person who had delivered his
?rst letter. This report moved Paul not only to
praise the brothers for their love and endurance but
also to correct the idea of some in Thessalonica that
the Lord’s presence was imminent.—2 Thess. 1:3-12;
2:1, 2.
Paul’s letter to the Galatians implies that he had
visited them at least twice before writing to them. In
47-48 C.E., Paul and Barnabas visited Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe, all of which lay
within the Roman province of Galatia. In 49 C.E.,
Paul returned to the same area with Silas. (Acts
13:1–14:23; 16:1-6) Paul penned this letter because
Judaizers, who followed quickly on his heels, were
teaching that circumcision and observance of the
Law of Moses were necessary for Christians. Doubtless Paul wrote to the Galatians as soon as he heard
of this false teaching. He may well have written from
Corinth, but it is also possible that he wrote either
from Ephesus, during a brief stopover on his journey back to Syrian Antioch, or from Antioch itself.
—Acts 18:18-23.
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

297

tentmaking involve? The trade could involve weaving
the tent cloth or cutting and sewing the coarse, sti?
material in order to make the tents. Either way, it was
hard work.
6

Paul did not consider tentmaking his vocation, or

career. He worked at this trade only to support himself in the ministry, declaring the good news “without
cost.” (2 Cor. 11:7) How did Aquila and Priscilla view
their trade? As Christians, they no doubt viewed secular work as Paul did. In fact, when Paul left Corinth in
52 C.E., Aquila and Priscilla pulled up stakes and followed him to Ephesus, where their home was used as
the meeting place for the local congregation. (1 Cor.
16:19) Later, they returned to Rome and then went
back again to Ephesus. This zealous couple put Kingdom interests ?rst and willingly expended themselves
in the service of others, thereby earning the gratitude
of “all the congregations of the nations.”—Rom. 16:3-5;
2 Tim. 4:19.
7

Present-day Christians follow the example of Paul,

6, 7. (a) How did Paul view tentmaking, and what indicates that Aquila and Priscilla had a similar view? (b) How do Christians today follow
the example of Paul, Aquila, and Priscilla?
298

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Aquila, and Priscilla. Zealous ministers today work
hard “so as not to put an expensive burden upon” others. (1 Thess. 2:9) Commendably, many full-time Kingdom proclaimers work part-time or do seasonal work
to support themselves in their vocation, the Christian
ministry. Like Aquila and Priscilla, many warmhearted servants of Jehovah open their homes to traveling
overseers. Those who thus “follow the course of hospitality” know how encouraging and upbuilding doing
so can be.—Rom. 12:13.

8

“Many of the Corinthians . . . B egan to B elieve”
(Acts 18:5-8)
That Paul viewed secular work as a means to an end

became obvious when Silas and Timothy arrived from
Macedonia with generous gifts. (2 Cor. 11:9) Immediately, Paul “began to be intensely occupied with the
word [“devoted all his time to preaching,” The Jerusalem Bible].” (Acts 18:5) However, this intense witnessing to the Jews met with considerable opposition. Disclaiming any further responsibility for their refusal to
accept the lifesaving message about the Christ, Paul
8, 9. How did Paul respond when his intense witnessing to the Jews met
with opposition, and where did he then go to preach?
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

299

shook out his garments and told his Jewish opposers:
“Let your blood be upon your own heads. I am clean.
From now on I will go to people of the nations.”—Acts
18:6; Ezek. 3:18, 19.
9

Where, then, would Paul now preach? A man

named Titius Justus, likely a Jewish proselyte whose
house was adjacent to the synagogue, opened up his
home to Paul. So Paul transferred from the synagogue
to the house of Justus. (Acts 18:7) The home of Aquila and Priscilla remained Paul’s residence while he was
in Corinth, but the house of Justus became the center
from which the apostle carried on his preaching activity.
10

Did Paul’s statement that he would henceforth go

to people of the nations mean that he completely
turned his attention away from all Jews and Jewish
proselytes, even responsive ones? That could hardly
have been the case. For example, “Crispus the presiding o?cer of the synagogue became a believer in the
Lord, and so did all his household.” Evidently, a number of those associated with the synagogue joined Cris10. What shows that Paul was not determined to preach only to people
of the nations?
300

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

pus, for the Bible says: “Many of the Corinthians that
heard began to believe and be baptized.” (Acts 18:8)
The house of Titius Justus thus became the location
where the newly formed Christian congregation of
Corinth met. If the Acts account is presented in Luke’s
characteristic style—that is, chronologically—then the
conversion of those Jews or proselytes took place after
Paul shook out his garments. The incident would then
speak volumes about the apostle’s ?exibility.
11

In many lands today, the churches of Christendom

are well-established and have a strong hold on their
members. In some countries and islands of the sea, the
missionaries of Christendom have done a great deal of
proselytizing. People claiming to be Christian are often
bound by tradition, as were the Jews in ?rst-century
Corinth. Still, like Paul, we as Jehovah’s Witnesses
zealously reach out to such people, building on whatever knowledge of the Scriptures they may have. Even
when they oppose us or their religious leaders persecute us, we do not lose hope. Among those who
“have a zeal for God; but not according to accurate
11. How do Jehovah’s Witnesses today imitate Paul as they reach out
to those in Christendom?
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

301

knowledge,” there may be many meek ones who need
to be searched for and found.—Rom. 10:2.

“I Have Many People in This City”
(Acts 18:9-17)
12 If Paul had any doubt about continuing his ministry in Corinth, it must have disappeared on the night
when the Lord Jesus appeared to him in a vision and
told him: “Have no fear, but keep on speaking and do
not keep silent, because I am with you and no man will
assault you so as to do you injury; for I have many people in this city.” (Acts 18:9, 10) What an encouraging
vision! The Lord himself assured Paul that he would
be protected from injury and that there were many deserving ones in the city. How did Paul respond to
the vision? We read: “He stayed set there a year and
six months, teaching among them the word of God.”
—Acts 18:11.
13

After spending about a year in Corinth, Paul re-

ceived further proof of the Lord’s support. “The Jews
rose up with one accord against Paul and led him
to the judgment seat,” called the bema. (Acts 18:12)
12. What assurance does Paul receive in a vision?
13. What incident might Paul have thought of as he approached the judgment seat, but what reason did he have to expect a di?erent outcome?
302

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Thought by some to be a raised platform of blue and
white marble full of decorative carvings, the bema may
have been situated near the center of Corinth’s marketplace. The open area in front of the bema was large
enough for a sizable crowd to gather. Archaeological
discoveries suggest that the judgment seat may have
been only a few steps from the synagogue and, therefore, from Justus’ house. As Paul approached the bema, he may have thought about the stoning of Stephen,
who is sometimes referred to as the ?rst Christian martyr. Paul, known then as Saul, had approved of “the
murder of him.” (Acts 8:1) Would something similar
now happen to Paul? No, for he had been promised:
“No one shall . . . injure you.”—Acts 18:10, An American Translation.
14

What happened when Paul got to the judgment

seat? The magistrate occupying it was the proconsul of
Achaia, named Gallio—the older brother of the Roman philosopher Seneca. The Jews launched this accusation against Paul: “Contrary to the law this person
14, 15. (a) What accusation did the Jews launch against Paul, and why
did Gallio dismiss the case? (b) What happened to Sosthenes, and what
might have become of him?
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

303

leads men to another persuasion in worshiping God.”
(Acts 18:13) The Jews implied that Paul had been proselytizing illegally. However, Gallio saw that Paul had
committed no “wrong” and was not guilty of any “wicked act of villainy.” (Acts 18:14) Gallio had no intention
of getting involved in the controversies of the Jews.
Why, before Paul uttered even a word in his own defense, Gallio dismissed the case! The accusers were enraged. They vented their anger on Sosthenes, who had
perhaps replaced Crispus as the presiding o?cer of the
synagogue. They seized Sosthenes “and went to beating him in front of the judgment seat.”—Acts 18:17.
15

Why did Gallio not prevent the crowd from thrash-

ing Sosthenes? Perhaps Gallio thought that Sosthenes
was the leader of the mob action against Paul and was
therefore getting what he deserved. Whether that was
the case or not, the incident possibly had a good outcome. In his ?rst letter to the Corinthian congregation,
written several years later, Paul referred to a certain
Sosthenes as a brother. (1 Cor. 1:1, 2) Was this the
same Sosthenes who had been beaten in Corinth? If so,
the painful experience may have helped Sosthenes to
embrace Christianity.
304

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

16

Recall that it was after the Jews had rejected Paul’s

preaching that the Lord Jesus assured Paul: “Have no
fear, but keep on speaking and do not keep silent, because I am with you.” (Acts 18:9, 10) We do well to
keep those words in mind, especially when our message is rejected. Never forget that Jehovah reads hearts
and draws honesthearted ones to himself. (1 Sam. 16:7;
John 6:44) What an encouragement that is for us to
keep busy in the ministry! Each year hundreds of thousands are getting baptized—hundreds every day. To
those who heed the command to “make disciples of
people of all the nations,” Jesus o?ers this reassurance:
“I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the
system of things.”—Matt. 28:19, 20.
17

“If Jehovah Is Willing” (Acts 18:18-22)
Whether Gallio’s stance toward Paul’s accusers re-

sulted in a period of peace for the ?edgling Christian
congregation in Corinth cannot be ascertained. However, Paul stayed “quite some days longer” before saying good-bye to his Corinthian brothers. In the spring
16. What bearing do the Lord’s words, “Keep on speaking and do not
keep silent, because I am with you,” have on our ministry?
17, 18. What might Paul have re?ected on as he sailed to Ephesus?
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

305

of 52 C.E., he made plans to sail away to Syria from
the port of Cenchreae, about seven miles east of Corinth. Before leaving Cenchreae, though, Paul “had the
hair of his head clipped short . . . , for he had a vow.”1
(Acts 18:18) Afterward, he took Aquila and Priscilla
with him and sailed across the Aegean Sea to Ephesus
in Asia Minor.
18

As Paul sailed from Cenchreae, he likely re?ected

on his time in Corinth. He had many ?ne memories
and a basis for deep satisfaction. His 18-month ministry there had borne fruit. The ?rst congregation in
Corinth had been established, with the house of Justus as its meeting place. Among those who became believers were Justus, Crispus and his household, and
many others. Those new believers were dear to Paul,
for he had helped them to become Christians. He
would later write to them and describe them as a letter of recommendation inscribed on his heart. We too
feel a closeness to those whom we have had the privilege of helping to embrace true worship. How satisfying it is to see such living “letters of recommendation”!
—2 Cor. 3:1-3.
1 See the box “Paul’s Vow,” on page 307.
306

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

PAUL’S VOW



Acts 18:18 states that while Paul was in Cenchreae, “he had the hair of his head clipped short
. . . , for he had a vow.” What kind of vow was it?
Generally, a vow is a solemn promise voluntarily made to God to perform some act, make some
o?ering, or enter some condition. Some suppose
that Paul had his hair cut to ful?ll a Nazirite vow.
Yet, it should be noted that according to the Scriptures, on completing a period of special service to
Jehovah, a Nazirite was to have his head shaved
“at the entrance of the tent of meeting.” It would
seem that such a requirement could be carried
out only in Jerusalem and thus not in Cenchreae.
—Num. 6:5, 18.
The Acts account says nothing regarding when
Paul made his vow. It could conceivably have been
made even before he became a Christian. The account is equally silent concerning whether Paul
made any speci?c request of Jehovah. One reference work suggests that Paul’s having his hair
clipped short could have been “an expression of
thanksgiving to God for his protection, which had
enabled [Paul] to complete his ministry at Corinth.”
“KEEP ON SPEAKING AND DO NOT KEEP SILENT”

307

19

Upon arriving in Ephesus, Paul immediately went

about his work. He “entered into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.” (Acts 18:19) Paul stayed in Ephesus for only a short time on that occasion. Although
asked to stay longer, “he would not consent.” When saying good-bye, he told the Ephesians: “I will return to you
again, if Jehovah is willing.” (Acts 18:20, 21) Paul no
doubt recognized that there was much preaching to be
done in Ephesus. The apostle planned on returning, but
he chose to leave matters in Jehovah’s hands. Is that not
a good example for us to keep in mind? In pursuing spiritual goals, we need to take the initiative. However, we
must always rely on Jehovah’s direction and seek to act
in harmony with his will.—Jas. 4:15.
20 Leaving Aquila and Priscilla in Ephesus, Paul put
out to sea and came down to Caesarea. He apparently
“went up” to Jerusalem and greeted the congregation
there. (Acts 18:22; ftn.) Then Paul went to his home base
—Syrian Antioch. His second missionary journey had
come to a successful conclusion. What awaited him on
his ?nal missionary journey?
19, 20. What did Paul do upon arriving in Ephesus, and what do we learn
from him about pursuing spiritual goals?
308

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

S E C T I O N 7 ? AC TS 18:23–21:17



“TEACHING . . . PUBLICLY
AND FROM HOUSE TO
HOUSE”
ACTS 20:20
Why do we need to be humble as well as adaptable in teaching others? What is the primary
method of preaching the good news? How can
we show that the doing of God’s will is more
important than our own personal pursuits? The
thrilling record of Paul’s third and ?nal missionary journey can help us to answer these vital
questions.

CHAPTER 20



“Growing and Prevailing”
Despite Opposition
How Apollos and Paul contribute toward the
continued victory of the good news
Based on Acts 18:23–19:41

THE streets of Ephesus resound with shouts, cries, and
the thunder of crowds running. A mob has formed, and
a full-blown riot is under way! Two of the apostle Paul’s
traveling companions are seized and dragged along.
The wide, colonnaded street where the shops are located empties quickly as the rabid crowd swells and storms
into the city’s huge amphitheater, which could accommodate 25,000 spectators. Most of the people do not
even know what has caused the uproar, but they have a
faint idea that their temple and their beloved goddess
Artemis are being threatened. So they begin to chant
frantically: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”—Acts
19:34.
2

Once again, we see Satan trying to use mob violence

1, 2. (a) Paul and his companions face what danger in Ephesus? (b) What
will we discuss in this chapter?
310

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

to stop the spread of the good news of God’s Kingdom.
Of course, the threat of violence is not Satan’s only tactic. In this chapter, we will discuss a number of Satan’s
schemes to undermine the work and unity of those ?rstcentury Christians. More important, we will see that all
his tactics failed, for “in a mighty way the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.” (Acts 19:20) Why did
those Christians prove victorious? For the same reasons that we do today. Of course, the victory is Jehovah’s, not ours. However, like the ?rst-century Christians, we must do our part. With the aid of Jehovah’s
spirit, we can acquire qualities that will help to ensure
the success of our ministry. Let us ?rst consider the example of Apollos.

“He Was Well Versed in the S criptures”
(Acts 18:24-28)
3

While Paul was on his way to Ephesus during his

third missionary tour, a Jew named Apollos arrived
in the city. He was from the famed city of Alexandria, Egypt. Apollos had some outstanding qualities. He spoke very well. In addition to his eloquence,
3, 4. What lack did Aquila and Priscilla perceive in Apollos, and how
did they address it?
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

311

“he was well versed in the Scriptures.” Furthermore,
he was “aglow with the spirit.” Full of zeal, Apollos
spoke boldly before Jewish audiences in the synagogue.
—Acts 18:24, 25.
4

Aquila and Priscilla heard Apollos speak. No doubt

they were thrilled to hear him teach “with correctness
the things about Jesus.” What he said about Jesus was
accurate. However, before long that Christian couple
detected an important gap in Apollos’ knowledge. He
was “acquainted with only the baptism of John.” This
humble couple, tentmakers by trade, were not intimidated by the eloquence or education of Apollos. Rather, “they took him into their company and expounded
the way of God more correctly to him.” (Acts 18:25, 26)
And how did this well-spoken, learned man respond?
Evidently, he showed one of the most important qualities that a Christian can cultivate—humility.
5

Because Apollos accepted the assistance of Aquila

and Priscilla, he became a more e?ective servant of Jehovah. He traveled on to Achaia, where he “greatly
helped” the believers. His preaching also proved e?ec5, 6. What enabled Apollos to become more useful to Jehovah, and what
may we learn from Apollos’ example?
312

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

tive against those Jews in that region who insisted
that Jesus was not the foretold Messiah. Luke reports:
“With intensity he thoroughly proved the Jews to be
wrong publicly, while he demonstrated by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.” (Acts 18:27, 28) What
a blessing Apollos became! In e?ect, he was another
reason why “the word of Jehovah” went on prevailing.
What can we learn from Apollos’ example?
6

Cultivating humility is absolutely essential for

Christians. Each of us is blessed with various gifts
—whether these have to do with natural abilities, experience, or knowledge that we have acquired. However,
our humility must exceed our gifts. Otherwise, our assets may become liabilities. We may become fertile
ground for the growth of that poisonous weed haughtiness. (1 Cor. 4:7; Jas. 4:6) If we are truly humble, we will
endeavor to see others as superior to us. (Phil. 2:3) We
will neither resent correction nor resist being taught by
others. We will certainly not cling proudly to our own
ideas when we learn that these are out of harmony with
the present leadings of the holy spirit. As long as we remain humble, we are useful to Jehovah and his Son.
—Luke 1:51, 52.
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

313

Humility also defuses rivalry. Can you imagine how
eager Satan was to create divisions among those early
Christians? How delighted he would have been if two
such dynamic personalities as Apollos and the apostle
Paul had allowed themselves to become rivals, perhaps
jealously vying for in?uence among the congregations!
It would have been easy for them to do so. In Corinth, some Christians began saying, “I belong to Paul,”
while others said, “But I to Apollos.” Did Paul and
Apollos encourage such divisive sentiments? No! And
Paul humbly acknowledged Apollos’ contribution to
the work, granting him privileges of service. For his
part, Apollos followed Paul’s direction. (1 Cor. 1:10-12;
3:6, 9; Titus 3:12, 13) What a ?ne example of humble cooperation for us today!
7

“Using Persuasion Concerning the Kingdom”
(Acts 18:23; 19:1-10)
8 Paul had promised to return to Ephesus, and he
kept his word.1 (Acts 18:20, 21) Note, though, how he returned. We last saw him in Antioch, Syria. To reach
Ephesus, he could have made the short trip to Seleucia,
1 See the box “Ephesus—Capital of Asia,” on page 316.

7. How did Paul and Apollos set an example of humility?
8. By what route did Paul return to Ephesus, and why?
314

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

boarded a ship, and sailed directly to his destination.
Instead, he traveled “through the inland parts.” By one
estimate, Paul’s journey as traced out in Acts 18:23 and
19:1 encompassed about a thousand miles! Why did
Paul choose such an arduous route? Because he had as
his aim, “strengthening all the disciples.” (Acts 18:23)
His third missionary journey, like the previous two,
would demand much of him, but he considered it all
worthwhile. Traveling ministers and their wives today
display a like spirit. Do we not appreciate their selfsacri?cing love?
9

Upon his arrival at Ephesus, Paul found a group of

about a dozen disciples of John the Baptizer. They had
been baptized under an arrangement that was no longer
valid. Furthermore, they seemed to know little or nothing about the holy spirit. Paul brought them up-to-date,
and like Apollos, they proved to be humble and eager
to learn. After being baptized in the name of Jesus, they
received holy spirit and some miraculous gifts. Clearly,
then, keeping up with Jehovah’s advancing theocratic
organization brings blessings.—Acts 19:1-7.
9. Why did a group of disciples need to be rebaptized, and what lesson
may we learn from their course?
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

315

EPHESUS—CAPITAL OF ASIA



Ephesus was the largest city in western Asia Minor. In the apostle Paul’s day, its population probably exceeded 250,000. As the capital of the Roman
province of Asia, it proudly bore the title “First and
Greatest Metropolis of Asia.”
Ephesus derived great wealth from commerce and
religion. Located close to the mouth of a navigable
river, its seaport stood at the intersection of trade
routes. Ephesus was home not only to the famous
temple of Artemis but also to the shrines and temples of numerous other Greco-Roman, Egyptian,
and Anatolian deities.
The temple of Artemis, lauded as one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, measured approximately 350 feet by 160 feet. It contained some 100
marble pillars, each about 6 feet in diameter at the
base and almost 55 feet high. The temple was considered sacrosanct throughout the ancient Mediterranean area, and huge sums of money were entrusted to the safekeeping of Artemis; so the temple also
became the most important banking center in Asia.
Other important buildings in Ephesus were a stadium for athletic contests and possibly even gladiatorial combat, a theater, civic and commercial
squares, and colonnades housing shops.
316

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

The Greek geographer Strabo reports that the
harbor of Ephesus su?ered from silting. In time, the
city therefore ceased to function as a port and was
abandoned. Since no modern city stands on the
same site, present-day visitors to the extensive ruins
of Ephesus can, in e?ect, step back into the ancient
world.
10

Another example of progress soon followed. Paul

preached boldly in the synagogue for three months. Although he was “using persuasion concerning the kingdom of God,” some hardened themselves and became
real opposers. Rather than wasting time with those who
were “speaking injuriously about The Way,” Paul made
arrangements to speak in a school auditorium. (Acts 19:
8, 9) Those who wanted to make spiritual progress
needed to make a move from the synagogue to the auditorium. Like Paul, we may withdraw from some conversations when we recognize that the householder is
unwilling to listen or only wants to argue. There are
still plenty of sheeplike people who need to hear our encouraging message!
10. Why did Paul move from the synagogue to an auditorium, setting
what example for us in our ministry?
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

317

11

Paul may have spoken in that school auditorium

daily from about 11:00 a.m. until about 4:00 p.m. (Acts
19:9, ftn.) Those were likely the quietest but hottest
hours of the day when many stopped their work to eat
and rest. Imagine if Paul followed that rigorous schedule for two full years, he would have spent well over
3,000 hours teaching.1 Here, then, is another reason
why the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.
Paul was industrious and adaptable. He adjusted his
schedule so that his ministry met the needs of the people in that community. The result? “All those inhabiting the district of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both
Jews and Greeks.” (Acts 19:10) What a thorough witness he gave!
12

Jehovah’s Witnesses in modern times have likewise

proved to be industrious and adaptable. We endeavor to
reach people wherever and whenever they can be found.
We witness on the streets, at the marketplaces, and in
parking lots. We may contact people by telephone or by
1 Paul also wrote 1 Corinthians while in Ephesus.

11, 12. (a) How did Paul set an example in being industrious and adaptable? (b) How have Jehovah’s Witnesses endeavored to be industrious and
adaptable in their public ministry?
318

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

letter. And in the house-to-house work, we make e?orts
to reach people at times when we are most likely to ?nd
them at home.

“Growing and Prevailing” Despite
Wicked Spirits (Acts 19:11-22)
13 Luke informs us that a remarkable period ensued,
with Jehovah enabling Paul to perform “extraordinary
works of power.” Even cloths and aprons that Paul
wore were taken to sick people, who were cured. Wicked spirits were driven out by these means too.1 (Acts 19:
11, 12) Such outstanding victories over Satan’s forces
drew much attention, not all of it positive.
Some “roving Jews who practiced the casting out
of demons” sought to duplicate Paul’s miracles. Certain ones of those Jews tried to expel demons by invoking the names of Jesus and Paul. Luke gives the
example of the seven sons of Sceva—members of a
priestly family—who sought to do this. The demon
14

1 The cloths may have been handkerchiefs worn by Paul around the
forehead to keep perspiration from running into the eyes. That Paul
also wore aprons at this time suggests that he may have been plying
his trade of tentmaking during his free hours, perhaps in the early
mornings.—Acts 20:34, 35.

13, 14. (a) Jehovah enabled Paul to do what? (b) What mistake did the
sons of Sceva make, and how do many in Christendom today err in a
similar way?
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

319

said to them: “I know Jesus and I am acquainted with
Paul; but who are you?” The possessed man then attacked those charlatans, leaping upon them like a
wild beast, sending them scurrying o?, wounded and
naked. (Acts 19:13-16) This was a resounding victory for “the word of Jehovah,” as the contrast between the power given to Paul and the powerlessness of those false religionists could not have been
plainer. There are millions today who wrongly assume
that simply calling on the name of Jesus or labeling oneself “Christian” is enough. As Jesus indicated,
though, only those actually doing the will of his Father have a real hope for the future.—Matt. 7:21-23.
15

The humiliation of the sons of Sceva led to a wide-

spread godly fear, which in?uenced many to become
believers and abandon spiritistic practices. Ephesian
culture was steeped in the magical arts. Spells and amulets were commonplace, as were incantations, often in
written form. Many Ephesians were now moved to
bring out their books on magical arts and burn them
publicly—though these were evidently worth tens of
15. When it comes to spiritism and objects connected with spiritistic
practices, how can we follow the example of the Ephesians?
320

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

thousands of dollars by present standards.1 Luke reports: “Thus in a mighty way the word of Jehovah kept
growing and prevailing.” (Acts 19:17-20) What a marvelous victory of truth over falsehood and demonism!
Those faithful people set a good example for us today.
We likewise live in a world steeped in spiritism. Should
we ?nd that we own something connected to spiritism,
we would do as the Ephesians did—get rid of it promptly! Let us keep far away from such disgusting practices,
whatever the cost.

“There Arose No Little Disturbance” (Acts 19:23-41)
16 We come now to the tactic of Satan described by
Luke when he wrote that “there arose no little disturbance concerning The Way.” He was hardly overstating
matters.2 (Acts 19:23) A silversmith named Demetrius
1 Luke cites a value of 50,000 silver pieces. If he meant the denarius, it would have taken a worker back then 50,000 days—about
137 years—to earn that amount of money if he worked seven days a
week.
2 Some say that Paul referred to this incident when he told the Corinthians that “we were very uncertain even of our lives.” (2 Cor.
1:8) However, he may have had in mind a more dangerous occasion.
When Paul wrote that he “fought with wild beasts at Ephesus,” he
could have been referring to an experience with ferocious animals in
an arena or to human opposition. (1 Cor. 15:32) Both the literal and
the ?gurative interpretations are possible.

16, 17. (a) Describe how Demetrius got the riot started in Ephesus.
(b) How did the Ephesians show their fanaticism?
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

321

started the trouble. He got the attention of his fellow
craftsmen by ?rst reminding them that their prosperity came from selling idols. He went on to suggest
that the message Paul preached was bad for business,
since the Christians did not worship idols. Then he appealed to the civic pride and nationalism of his audience, warning them that their goddess Artemis and
their world-famous temple to her were in danger of being “brought down to nothing.”—Acts 19:24-27.
17

Demetrius’ speech had the desired e?ect. The sil-

versmiths began chanting “Great is Artemis of the
Ephesians,” and the city became ?lled with confusion,
leading to the fanatic mob scene described at the outset of this chapter.1 Paul, self-sacri?cing soul that he
was, wanted to go into the amphitheater to address the
crowd, but the disciples insisted that he stay out of danger. A certain Alexander stood before the crowd and attempted to speak. Since he was a Jew, he may have been
eager to explain the di?erence between Jews and these
Christians. Such explanations would have been lost on
that crowd. When they recognized him as a Jew, they
1 Such guilds, or unions, of craftsmen could be quite powerful.
About a century later, for example, the bakers’ guild incited a similar riot in Ephesus.
322

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

shouted him down, repeating the chant “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians” for about two hours. Religious
fanaticism has not changed since then. It still makes
people completely unreasonable.—Acts 19:28-34.
Finally, the city recorder quieted the crowd. A capable man with presence of mind, this o?cial assured
the mob that their temple and goddess were in no danger from these Christians, that Paul and his companions had committed no crime against the temple of Artemis, and that there was a due process in place for
raising such issues. Perhaps most tellingly, he reminded the mob that they were in danger of incurring the
wrath of Rome for this unlawful and unruly gathering.
With that, he dismissed the crowd. As quickly as their
rage had erupted, it now subsided because of these rational and practical words.—Acts 19:35-41.
19 This was not the ?rst time that a levelheaded man in
a position of secular authority had acted to protect Jesus’
followers, nor would it be the last. In fact, the apostle John
foresaw in avision that during these last days, the stable elements of this world, pictured by the earth, would swallow
18

18, 19. (a) How did the city recorder quiet the mob in Ephesus? (b) How
have Jehovah’s people at times been protected by secular authorities, and
what role may we play in such protection?
“GROWING AND PREVAILING” DESPITE OPPOSITION

323

up a veritable ?ood of satanic persecution against Jesus’
followers. (Rev. 12:15, 16) That has proved true. In many
cases, fair-mindedjudges have moved to protect the rights
of Jehovah’s Witnesses to meet for worship and to share
the good news with others. Of course, our own conduct
may play a role in such victories. Paul’s conduct had apparently won him the friendly respect of some governmental o?cials in Ephesus, so they were eager to see him
safe. (Acts 19:31) May our honest and respectful conduct
make a favorable impression on those we meet as well. We
never know how far-reaching the e?ects may be.
20 Is it not thrilling to contemplate how “the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing” in the ?rst century?
It is equally thrilling to see how Jehovah has been behind
similar victories in our time. Would you like to have the
privilege of playing a part, however small, in such victories? Then learn from the examples we have considered.
Stay humble, keep up with Jehovah’s progressive organization, keep working hard, repudiate spiritism, and do
your utmost to give a good witness through your honest
and respectful conduct.
20. (a) How do you feel about the way Jehovah’s word prevailed in the
?rst century and is prevailing today? (b) What is your resolve regarding
Jehovah’s victories in our time?
324

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 21



“I Am Clean From
the Blood of All Men”
Paul’s zeal in the ministry and
his counsel to elders
Based on Acts 20:1-38

PAUL is in a crowded upper chamber in Troas. He
speaks at length to the brothers, since this is the last
evening he will be with them. It is now midnight.
There are quite a few lamps burning in the room, adding to the heat and perhaps contributing to a smoky
atmosphere. Seated at one of the windows is a young
man named Eutychus. As Paul is speaking, Eutychus
falls asleep and tumbles out of the third-story window!
2

As a physician, Luke is likely among the ?rst to

rush outside and examine the young man. There is no
question about his condition. Eutychus is “picked up
dead.” (Acts 20:9) But then a miracle occurs. Paul
throws himself upon the young man and says to the
1-3. (a) Describe the circumstances surrounding the death of Eutychus.
(b) What does Paul do, and what does this incident show about Paul?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

325

crowd: “Stop raising a clamor, for his soul is in him.”
Paul has raised Eutychus back to life!—Acts 20:10.
3

That incident demonstrates the power of God’s

holy spirit. Paul could not rightly be blamed for the
death of Eutychus. Still, he did not want the young
man’s death to mar this important occasion or to
stumble anyone spiritually. By resurrecting Eutychus,
Paul left the congregation comforted and fully invigorated to carry on their ministry. Clearly, Paul took a
very responsible view of the lives of others. We are reminded of his words: “I am clean from the blood of all
men.” (Acts 20:26) Let us consider how Paul’s example can help us in this regard.

4

“He Went Forth to Journey Into Macedonia”
(Acts 20:1, 2)
As discussed in the preceding chapter, Paul had

been through a harrowing ordeal. His ministry in Ephesus had stirred up quite a commotion. Indeed, the silversmiths whose livelihood depended on the worship
of Artemis had taken part in a riot! “After the uproar
had subsided,” Acts 20:1 relates, “Paul sent for the disciples, and when he had encouraged them and bidden
4. What harrowing ordeal had Paul been through?
326

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

them farewell, he went forth to journey into Macedonia.”
5

On the way to Macedonia, Paul stopped in the sea-

port of Troas and spent time there. Paul hoped that
Titus, who had been sent to Corinth, would join him
there. (2 Cor. 2:12, 13) However, when it became evident that Titus was not coming, Paul went on to Macedonia, perhaps spending a year or so “encouraging
the ones there with many a word.”1 (Acts 20:2) Titus
?nally joined Paul in Macedonia, bringing good news
regarding the Corinthians’ response to Paul’s ?rst letter. (2 Cor. 7:5-7) This moved Paul to write another
letter to them, which we now know as 2 Corinthians.
6

It is noteworthy that Luke uses the words “encour-

aged” and “encouraging” to describe Paul’s visits to
the brothers in Ephesus and Macedonia. How well
those words express Paul’s attitude toward fellow believers! In contrast with the Pharisees, who looked
upon others with contempt, Paul viewed the sheep as
1 See the box “Paul’s Letters From Macedonia,” on page 328.

5, 6. (a) How long may Paul have been in Macedonia, and what did he
do for the brothers there? (b) What attitude did Paul maintain toward
his fellow believers?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

327

PAUL’S LETTERS FROM MACED ONIA



In his second letter to the Corinthians, Paul says
that when he arrived in Macedonia, he was anxious about his brothers in Corinth. However, Titus
brought him good news from Corinth, and Paul was
comforted. It was then, in about 55 C.E., that Paul
wrote 2 Corinthians in which he indicates that he
was still in Macedonia. (2 Cor. 7:5-7; 9:2-4) One of
the things on Paul’s mind during this period was the
completing of the collection for the holy ones in Judea. (2 Cor. 8:18-21) He was also worried about
the presence in Corinth of “false apostles, deceitful
workers.”—2 Cor. 11:5, 13, 14.
It is possible that Paul’s letter to Titus was written
from Macedonia. Sometime during the years 61 to
64 C.E., after being released from his ?rst Roman
captivity, Paul visited the island of Crete. He left Titus there to correct certain problems and make congregation appointments. (Titus 1:5) Paul asked Titus
to meet him in Nicopolis. There were a number of
cities of this name in the ancient Mediterranean
area, but it seems most likely that Paul was referring to the Nicopolis in northwest Greece. The
apostle was probably working in that general area
when he wrote to Titus.—Titus 3:12.
328

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Paul’s ?rst letter to Timothy also belongs to the period between his two imprisonments in Rome, from
61 to 64 C.E. In the introduction to this letter, Paul
indicates that he asked Timothy to remain in Ephesus, while he himself went to Macedonia. (1 Tim.
1:3) From there, it seems, Paul wrote this letter to
give Timothy fatherly advice, encouragement, and
direction on certain procedures to be followed in
the congregations.

fellow workers. (John 7:47-49; 1 Cor. 3:9) Paul maintained that attitude even when he had to give them
strong counsel.—2 Cor. 2:4.
7

Today, congregation elders and traveling overseers

strive to imitate Paul’s example. Even when giving
reproof, they have the goal of strengthening those
needing assistance. Overseers empathetically seek to
encourage rather than condemn. One experienced
traveling overseer put it this way: “Most of our brothers and sisters want to do what is right, but they often
struggle with frustrations, fears, and the feeling that
they are powerless to help themselves.” Overseers can
7. How can Christian overseers today imitate Paul’s example?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

329

be a source of strength to such fellow believers.—Heb.
12:12, 13.
“A Plot Was Hatched Against Him” (Acts 20:3, 4)
8 From Macedonia, Paul went to Corinth.1 After
spending three months there, he was eager to move on
to Cenchreae, where he planned to board a boat to
Syria. From there, he would be able to go to Jerusalem and deliver the contributions to the needy brothers there.2 (Acts 24:17; Rom. 15:25, 26) However, an
unexpected turn of events changed Paul’s plans. Acts
20:3 reports: “A plot was hatched against him by the
Jews”!
9

It is not surprising that the Jews harbored animos-

ity toward Paul, for they considered him to be an apostate. Earlier, his ministry had led to the conversion of
Crispus—a prominent ?gure in the Corinthian synagogue. (Acts 18:7, 8; 1 Cor. 1:14) On another occasion,
the Jews in Corinth had brought charges against Paul
before Gallio, proconsul of Achaia. Yet, Gallio had
1 It was likely during this visit to Corinth that Paul wrote his letter to the Romans.
2 See the box “Paul Delivers Relief Contributions,” on page 332.

8, 9. (a) What interrupted Paul’s plans to sail to Syria? (b) Why might
the Jews have harbored animosity toward Paul?
330

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

dismissed those charges as baseless—a decision that
infuriated Paul’s enemies. (Acts 18:12-17) The Jews in
Corinth may have known or assumed that Paul would
soon set sail from nearby Cenchreae, so they devised
a scheme to ambush him there. What would Paul do?
10 In the interests of personal safety—and to protect
the funds with which he had been entrusted—Paul opted to stay away from Cenchreae and to retrace his steps
through Macedonia. Granted, traveling on land would
have its own dangers. Bandits often lurked along ancient roads. Even the inns could be unsafe. Still, Paul
chose the risks on land over those that awaited him at
Cenchreae. Thankfully, he was not traveling alone.
Paul’s companions for this part of his missionary tour
included Aristarchus, Gaius, Secundus, Sopater, Timothy, Trophimus, and Tychicus.—Acts 20:3, 4.
11 Like Paul, Christians today take measures to protect themselves while in the ministry. In some areas,
they travel in groups—or at least in pairs—rather
than alone. What about persecution? Christians realize that it is inevitable. (John 15:20; 2 Tim. 3:12) Still,
10. Was it cowardly of Paul to avoid Cenchreae? Explain.
11. How do Christians today take reasonable measures to protect themselves, and what example did Jesus set in this regard?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

331

PAUL DELIVERS RELIEF CONTRIBUTIONS



In the years that followed Pentecost 33 C.E.,
Christians in Jerusalem su?ered many hardships
—famine, persecution, and the plundering of their
belongings. As a consequence, some of them were
in need. (Acts 11:27–12:1; Heb. 10:32-34) Hence, in
about 49 C.E. when the elders in Jerusalem directed
Paul to concentrate his preaching activities among
the Gentiles, they urged him to “keep the poor in
mind.” That is just what Paul did by supervising
the collection of relief funds in the congregations.
—Gal. 2:10.
In 55 C.E., Paul told the Corinthians: “Just as I
gave orders to the congregations of Galatia, do that
way also yourselves. Every ?rst day of the week let
each of you at his own house set something aside in
store as he may be prospering, so that when I arrive
collections will not take place then. But when I get
there, whatever men you approve of by letters, these
I shall send to carry your kind gift to Jerusalem.”
(1 Cor. 16:1-3) Shortly thereafter, when Paul wrote
his second inspired letter to the Corinthians, he
urged them to get their gift ready, and he mentioned that the Macedonians too were contributing.
—2 Cor. 8:1–9:15.
332

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Thus it was that in 56 C.E., representatives of various congregations met with Paul to deliver the proceeds of the collection. Nine men traveling together not only provided a certain degree of security but
also shielded Paul from any possible accusation
of impropriety in the handling of donated funds.
(2 Cor. 8:20) The delivery of these contributions was
the main purpose of Paul’s journey to Jerusalem.
(Rom. 15:25, 26) Paul later remarked to Governor
Felix: “After quite a number of years I arrived to
bring gifts of mercy to my nation, and o?erings.”
—Acts 24:17.

they do not deliberately put themselves in harm’s way.
Consider the example of Jesus. On one occasion, when
opposers in Jerusalem began picking up stones to hurl
at him, “Jesus hid and went out of the temple.” (John
8:59) Later, when the Jews were plotting to kill him, “Jesus no longer walked about publicly among the Jews,
but he departed from there to the country near the
wilderness.” (John 11:54) Jesus took reasonable measures to protect himself when doing so did not con?ict
with God’s will for him. Christians today do the same.
—Matt. 10:16.
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

333

12

They Were “Comforted B eyond Measure”
(Acts 20:5-12)
Paul and his companions traveled through Mace-

donia together and then apparently split up. Evidently, the group reunited at Troas.1 The account says: “We
came to them in Troas within ?ve days.”2 (Acts 20:6)
It is here that the young man Eutychus was resurrected, as discussed at the outset of this chapter. Imagine
how the brothers felt to see their companion Eutychus
raised back to life! As the account reports, they were
“comforted beyond measure.”—Acts 20:12.
13

Of course, miracles of that sort do not occur to-

day. Still, those who have lost loved ones in death are
“comforted beyond measure” by the Bible-based hope
of the resurrection. (John 5:28, 29) Consider: Because
he was imperfect, Eutychus eventually died again.
(Rom. 6:23) But those who are resurrected in God’s
1 Luke’s use of the ?rst person at Acts 20:5, 6 seems to indicate that
he rejoined Paul at Philippi after having been left there by him some
time earlier.—Acts 16:10-17, 40.
2 The journey from Philippi to Troas took ?ve days. There may have
been adverse winds, for previously the same trip was made in just
two days.—Acts 16:11.

12, 13. (a) What e?ect did the resurrection of Eutychus have on the congregation? (b) What Bible-based hope comforts those today who have
lost loved ones in death?
334

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

new world have the prospect of living forever! Moreover, those who are raised to rule with Jesus in heaven are clothed with immortality. (1 Cor. 15:51-53)
Christians today—whether of the anointed or of the
“other sheep”—have good reason to be “comforted beyond measure.”—John 10:16.
“Publicly and From House to House” (Acts 20:13-24)
14 Paul and his group traveled from Troas to Assos,
then to Mitylene, Chios, Samos, and Miletus. Paul’s
goal was to reach Jerusalem in time for the Festival of
Pentecost. His haste to get to Jerusalem by Pentecost
explains why he selected a vessel that bypassed Ephesus on this return trip. Since Paul wanted to talk to
the Ephesian elders, however, he requested that they
meet him at Miletus. (Acts 20:13-17) When they arrived, Paul said to them: “You well know how from the
?rst day that I stepped into the district of Asia I was
with you the whole time, slaving for the Lord with the
greatest lowliness of mind and tears and trials that
befell me by the plots of the Jews; while I did not hold
back from telling you any of the things that were
14. What did Paul tell the Ephesian elders when he met with them at
Miletus?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

335

pro?table nor from teaching you publicly and from
house to house. But I thoroughly bore witness both to
Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and
faith in our Lord Jesus.”—Acts 20:18-21.
15

There are many ways to reach people with the

good news today. Like Paul, we strive to go where
the people are, whether at bus stops, on busy streets,
or in marketplaces. Yet, going from house to house
remains the primary preaching method used by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Why? For one thing, house-tohouse preaching gives all an adequate opportunity
to hear the Kingdom message on a regular basis,
thus demonstrating God’s impartiality. It also allows honesthearted ones to receive personal assistance according to their needs. In addition, the
house-to-house ministry builds the faith and endurance of those who engage in it. Indeed, a trademark
of true Christians today is their zeal in witnessing
“publicly and from house to house.”
16

Paul explained to the Ephesian elders that he did

15. What are some advantages of house-to-house witnessing?
16, 17. How did Paul show himself to be fearless, and how do Christians
today imitate his example?
336

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

not know what dangers would await him upon his return to Jerusalem. “Nevertheless, I do not make my
soul of any account as dear to me,” he told them, “if
only I may ?nish my course and the ministry that I
received of the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of
God.” (Acts 20:24) Fearlessly, Paul refused to let any
circumstance—whether poor health or bitter opposition—prevent him from completing his assignment.
17

Christians today likewise endure a variety of neg-

ative circumstances. Some face governmental ban and
persecution. Others courageously battle debilitating
physical or emotional illnesses. Christian youths deal
with peer pressure at school. In whatever circumstances they ?nd themselves, Jehovah’s Witnesses display
steadfastness, as did Paul. They are determined to
“bear thorough witness to the good news.”
“Pay Attention to Yourselves and to All the Flock”
(Acts 20:25-38)
18 Paul next gave straightforward admonition to
the Ephesian elders, using his own course as an
18. How did Paul keep himself free from bloodguilt, and how could the
Ephesian elders do the same?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

337

example. First he informed them that this was likely the last time they would see him. Then he stated: “I am clean from the blood of all men, for I
have not held back from telling you all the counsel
of God.” How could the Ephesian elders imitate
Paul, thus keeping themselves free from bloodguilt?
He told them: “Pay attention to yourselves and to
all the ?ock, among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation
of God, which he purchased with the blood of his
own Son.” (Acts 20:26-28) Paul warned that “oppressive wolves” would in?ltrate the ?ock and would
“speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves.” What should the elders do? “Keep
awake,” Paul warned, “and bear in mind that for
three years, night and day, I did not quit admonishing each one with tears.”—Acts 20:29-31.
19

“Oppressive wolves” made their appearance by the

end of the ?rst century. About 98 C.E., the apostle
John wrote: “There have come to be many antichrists;
19. What apostasy developed by the end of the ?rst century, and what
did this lead to in later centuries?
338

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

. . . They went out from us, but they were not of our
sort; for if they had been of our sort, they would have
remained with us.” (1 John 2:18, 19) By the third century, apostasy had led to the development of the clergy class of Christendom, and in the fourth century,
Emperor Constantine gave o?cial recognition to this
corrupt form of “Christianity.” By adopting pagan rituals and giving them a “Christian” veneer, religious
leaders did indeed “speak twisted things.” The e?ects
of that apostasy are still seen in the teachings and customs of Christendom.
20

Paul’s life course was in stark contrast to that of

those who would in later times take advantage of
the ?ock. He worked to support himself so as not
to impose a burden on the congregation. His e?orts
in behalf of fellow believers were not for personal
gain. Paul urged the Ephesian elders to display a
self-sacri?cing spirit. “You must assist those who are
weak,” he told them, “and must bear in mind the
words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said, ‘There
20, 21. How did Paul show a self-sacri?cing spirit, and how can Christian elders today do the same?
“I AM CLEAN FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN”

339

is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’ ”
—Acts 20:35.
21

Like Paul, Christian elders to day are self-

sacri?cing. In contrast with the clergy of Christendom,
who ?eece their ?ocks, those who are entrusted with
the responsibility to “shepherd the congregation of
God” perform their duties unsel?shly. Pride and ambition have no place in the Christian congregation, for
those who “search out their own glory” will fail in the
long run. (Prov. 25:27) Presumptuousness can only
lead to dishonor.—Prov. 11:2.
22

Paul’s genuine love for his brothers endeared him

to them. Indeed, when it was time for him to depart,
“quite a bit of weeping broke out among them all, and
they fell upon Paul’s neck and tenderly kissed him.”
(Acts 20:37, 38) Christians truly appreciate and love
those who, like Paul, give of themselves unsel?shly in
behalf of the ?ock. After considering Paul’s sterling
example, would you not agree that he was neither
boasting nor exaggerating when he stated: “I am clean
from the blood of all men”?—Acts 20:26.
22. What endeared Paul to the elders of Ephesus?
340

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 22



“Let the Will of Jehovah
Take Place”
Determined to do God’s will,
Paul goes to Jerusalem
Based on Acts 21:1-17

THE parting at Miletus is an emotional one. How dif?cult it is for Paul and Luke to tear themselves away
from the Ephesian elders, whom they have come to
love! The two missionaries stand on the deck of the
boat. Their baggage is packed with supplies needed for
the journey. They are also carrying the funds collected
for needy Christians in Judea and are eager to see the
delivery of this gift through to its completion.
2 A gentle breeze ?lls the sails, and the ship leaves the
clamor of the quay. The two men, along with their seven traveling companions, gaze at their sad-faced brothers on the shore. (Acts 20:4, 14, 15) The travelers keep
waving farewell until their friends fade into the distance.
3 For about three years, Paul has worked closely with
1-4. Why is Paul going to Jerusalem, and what awaits him there?
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

341

the elders in Ephesus. But now, directed by holy spirit,
he is on his way to Jerusalem. To some extent, he knows
what awaits him. Earlier, he told those elders: “Bound
in the spirit, I am journeying to Jerusalem, although
not knowing the things that will happen to me in it, except that from city to city the holy spirit repeatedly
bears witness to me as it says that bonds and tribulations are waiting for me.” (Acts 20:22, 23) Despite the
danger, Paul feels “bound in the spirit”—both obligated and willing to follow the spirit’s direction to go to
Jerusalem. He values his life, but the doing of God’s
will is the most important thing to him.
4 Is that how you feel? When we dedicate ourselves
to Jehovah, we solemnly promise to make the doing of
his will the most important thing in our life. We can
bene?t by considering the faithful example of the apostle Paul.
Passing “the Island of Cyprus” (Acts 21:1-3)
5 The boat that Paul and his companions boarded
“ran with a straight course.” That is, it sailed before the
wind, without tacking, and under fair winds until they
reached Cos later that same day. (Acts 21:1) It seems
that the boat anchored there overnight before sailing
5. By what course did Paul and his companions travel to Tyre?
342

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

on to Rhodes and Patara. At Patara, on the southern
coast of Asia Minor, the brothers boarded a large cargo ship, which carried them directly to Tyre, in Phoenicia. On the way, they passed “the island of Cyprus . . .
on the left [port] side.” (Acts 21:3) Why did Luke, the
writer of Acts, mention that detail?
Perhaps Paul pointed out the island and told of
his experiences there. On his ?rst missionary journey
about nine years earlier, Paul, along with Barnabas and
John Mark, had encountered the sorcerer Elymas, who
opposed their preaching. (Acts 13:4-12) Seeing that island and re?ecting on what had occurred there may
have encouraged Paul and strengthened him for what
lay ahead. We too can pro?t by re?ecting on how God
has blessed us and helped us to endure trials. Such re?ection may help us to echo the words of David, who
wrote: “Many are the calamities of the righteous one,
but out of them all Jehovah delivers him.”—Ps. 34:19.
6

7

“We Found the Disciples” (Acts 21:4-9)
Paul appreciated the value of Christian association

6. (a) Why might the sight of Cyprus have been encouraging to Paul?
(b) As you re?ect on how Jehovah has blessed and helped you, what conclusion do you reach?
7. What did the travelers do upon arriving at Tyre?
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

343

and was eager to be with those of like faith. Upon arriving at Tyre, Luke writes, “by a search we found
the disciples.” (Acts 21:4) Knowing there were fellow
Christians in Tyre, the travelers sought them out and
probably stayed with them. One of the great blessings
of having the truth is that no matter where we go, we
can ?nd like-minded believers who will welcome us.
Those who love God and who practice true worship
have friends all over the world.
8

In describing the seven days they stayed in Tyre,

Luke records something that may at ?rst seem puzzling: “Through the spirit [the brothers in Tyre] repeatedly told Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.” (Acts 21:4)
Had Jehovah changed his mind? Was he now directing
Paul not to go to Jerusalem? No. The spirit had indicated that Paul would be mistreated in Jerusalem, not
that he should avoid the city. It seems that by means of
holy spirit, the brothers in Tyre correctly concluded
that Paul would have trouble in Jerusalem. Therefore,
out of concern for Paul, they urged him not to go up to
the city. Their desire to protect Paul from impending
danger was understandable. Nevertheless, determined
8. How are we to understand Acts 21:4?
344

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

to do Jehovah’s will, Paul continued on his way to Jerusalem.—Acts 21:12.
9 Upon hearing the concerns of the brothers, perhaps
Paul recalled that Jesus had met a similar objection after telling his disciples that he would go to Jerusalem,
su?er many things, and be killed. Moved by sentimentality, Peter had said to Jesus: “Be kind to yourself,
Lord; you will not have this destiny at all.” Jesus replied: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling
block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but
those of men.” (Matt. 16:21-23) Jesus was determined
to accept the self-sacri?cing course that God had assigned to him. Paul felt the same way. The brothers in
Tyre, like the apostle Peter, undoubtedly had good intentions, but they did not discern God’s will.
The idea of being kind to yourself or following the
course of least resistance appeals to many today. People in general tend to seek a religion that is comfortable
and requires little of its members. In contrast, Jesus
urged a far di?erent mental attitude. He told his disciples: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown
10

9, 10. (a) Upon hearing the concerns of the brothers in Tyre, Paul might
have recalled what similar situation? (b) What idea is common in the
world today, and how does it contrast with the words of Jesus?
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

345

himself and pick up his torture stake and continually
follow me.” (Matt. 16:24) To follow Jesus is the wise
course, the right course, but it is not the easy course.
11

Soon it was time for Paul, Luke, and the others who

were with them to continue on their way. The description of their departure is touching. It shows the a?ection the Tyrian brothers had for Paul as well as their
strong support for his ministry. The men, women, and
children accompanied Paul and those with him to the
beach. As a group, they kneeled and prayed together
and then said farewell. Afterward, Paul, Luke, and their
traveling companions boarded another boat and continued on to Ptolemais, where they met the brothers
and stayed with them for one day.—Acts 21:5-7.
12 Next, Luke reports, Paul and those traveling with
him set out for Caesarea. Once there, they “entered into
the house of Philip the evangelizer.”1 (Acts 21:8) They
must have rejoiced to see Philip. Some 20 years earlier
1 See the box “Caesarea—Roman Provincial Capital of Judea,” on
page 348.

11. How did the disciples in Tyre show their a?ection and support for
Paul?
12, 13. (a) What record of faithful service did Philip have? (b) How is
Philip a good example for Christian fathers today?
346

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

in Jerusalem, he had been appointed by the apostles to
help care for the distribution of food in the infant
Christian congregation. Philip had a long record of
zealous preaching. Remember that when persecution
scattered the disciples, Philip went to Samaria and began to preach. Later, he preached to and baptized the
Ethiopian eunuch. (Acts 6:2-6; 8:4-13, 26-38) What a record of faithful service!
13

Philip had not lost his zeal for the ministry. Based

now in Caesarea, he was still busy in the preaching
work, as Luke shows by calling him “the evangelizer.”
We also learn that he now had four daughters who
prophesied, which suggests that they followed in their
father’s footsteps.1 (Acts 21:9) Philip, then, must have
done much to build up the spirituality of his household.
Christian fathers today do well to follow his example,
taking the lead in the ministry and helping their children to develop a love for the evangelizing work.
14

In one place after another, Paul sought out fellow

believers and spent time with them. Surely the local
1 See the box “Could Women Be Christian Ministers?” on page 350.

14. What no doubt resulted from Paul’s visits with fellow believers, and
what similar opportunities exist today?
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

347

CAESAREA—ROMAN PROVINCIAL
CAPITAL OF JUDEA

During the period covered by Acts, Caesarea was
the provincial capital of the Roman province of Judea, the seat of its governor and the headquarters
of its military contingent. Herod the Great built the
city and named it in honor of Caesar Augustus. Caesarea contained all the elements common to pagan
Hellenistic cities of the day—a temple dedicated to
the “divine” Caesar, a theater, a hippodrome, and an
amphitheater. The population was predominantly
Gentile.
Caesarea was a forti?ed port city. Herod’s ambition was that his new harbor complex called Sebastos (Greek for Augustus), equipped with a huge
breakwater on a coast otherwise inhospitable to
shipping, would rival Alexandria as the emporium
of the eastern Mediterranean. Although it never
surpassed Alexandria, Caesarea did achieve international importance because of its strategic position
on major trade routes.
The evangelizer Philip preached the good news in
Caesarea, and it seems that he raised his family
there. (Acts 8:40; 21:8, 9) It was the city where the
Roman centurion Cornelius was stationed and was
the scene of his conversion.—Acts 10:1.
348

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

The apostle Paul visited Caesarea a number of
times. Shortly after his conversion, when enemies
plotted to kill him, the disciples hurried their new
brother the 55 miles from Jerusalem to Caesarea in
order to send him o? by boat to Tarsus. Paul passed
through Caesarea’s port when heading for Jerusalem at the end of his second and his third missionary journeys. (Acts 9:28-30; 18:21, 22; 21:7, 8) He was
held for two years in Herod’s palace in Caesarea.
Paul there conversed with Felix, Festus, and Agrippa, and from there he ?nally sailed to Rome.—Acts
23:33-35; 24:27–25:4; 27:1.

brothers were eager to extend hospitality to this traveling missionary and his companions. Such visits no
doubt resulted in “an interchange of encouragement.”
(Rom. 1:11, 12) Similar opportunities exist today. Great
bene?ts result from opening your home, however humble, to a traveling overseer and his wife.—Rom. 12:13.
“I Am Ready . . . to Die” (Acts 21:10-14)
15 During Paul’s stay with Philip, another respected
visitor arrived—Agabus. Those gathered at Philip’s
home knew Agabus to be a prophet; he had foretold a
15, 16. What message did Agabus bring, and what e?ect did it have on
those who heard it?
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

349

COULD WOMEN BE
CHRISTIAN MINISTERS?

What was the role of women in the ?rst-century
Christian congregation? Could women be ministers?
Jesus instructed his followers to preach the good
news of the Kingdom and to make disciples. (Matt.
28:19, 20; Acts 1:8) This commission to be ministers
of the good news applies to all Christians, whether
men, women, boys, or girls. That this is so can be
seen from the prophecy found at Joel 2:28, 29, which
the apostle Peter showed had a ful?llment at Pentecost 33 C.E.: “ ‘In the last days,’ God says, ‘I shall
pour out some of my spirit upon every sort of ?esh,
and your sons and your daughters will prophesy . . .
and even upon my men slaves and upon my women
slaves I will pour out some of my spirit in those
days, and they will prophesy.’ ” (Acts 2:17, 18) As we
have noted, the evangelizer Philip had four daughters who prophesied.—Acts 21:8, 9.
When it came to teaching within the congregation,
however, God’s Word limited the appointment of
Christian overseers and ministerial servants to men.
(1 Tim. 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9) Paul, in fact, stated: “I do
not permit a woman to teach, or to exercise authority over a man, but to be in silence.”—1 Tim. 2:12.
350

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

great famine during the reign of Claudius. (Acts 11:27,
28) Perhaps they wondered: ‘Why has Agabus come?
What message does he bring?’ As they watched intently, he took Paul’s girdle—a long beltlike strip of cloth
that could hold money and other items and was worn
around the waist. With it, Agabus bound his own feet
and hands. Then he spoke. The message was sobering:
“Thus says the holy spirit, ‘The man to whom this girdle belongs the Jews will bind in this manner in Jerusalem and deliver into the hands of people of the nations.’ ”—Acts 21:11.
16

The prophecy con?rmed that Paul would go to

Jerusalem. It also indicated that his dealings with
the Jews there would result in his being delivered
“into the hands of people of the nations.” The
prophecy had a profound e?ect on those who were
present. Luke writes: “Now when we heard this,
both we and those of that place began entreating
him not to go up to Jerusalem. Then Paul answered: ‘What are you doing by weeping and making me weak at heart? Rest assured, I am ready not
only to be bound but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus.’ ”—Acts 21:12, 13.
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

351

Imagine the scene. The brothers, including Luke,
entreat Paul not to proceed. Some are weeping. Moved
by the loving concern they show for him, Paul tenderly says that they are making him “weak at heart,” or as
some translations render the Greek, they are “breaking
[his] heart.” Still, his resolve is ?rm, and as was the case
when he met with the brothers in Tyre, he will not allow entreaties or tears to cause him to waver. Instead,
he explains to them why he must proceed. What courage and determination he showed! Like Jesus before
him, Paul set his face steadfastly to go to Jerusalem.
(Heb. 12:2) Paul was not seeking to be a martyr, but if
that happened, he would consider it an honor to die as
a follower of Christ Jesus.
18 How did the brothers react? In a word, respectfully. We read: “When he would not be dissuaded, we acquiesced with the words: ‘Let the will of Jehovah take
place.’ ” (Acts 21:14) Those who tried to convince Paul
to avoid going to Jerusalem did not insist on having
their way. They listened to Paul and yielded, recognizing and accepting the will of Jehovah, even though doing so was di?cult for them. Paul had embarked on a
17

17, 18. How did Paul demonstrate his ?rm resolve, and how did the
brothers react?
352

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

course that would eventually lead to his death. It would
be easier for Paul if those who loved him did not try to
dissuade him.
19

We learn a valuable lesson from what happened to

Paul: We never want to try to dissuade others from pursuing a self-sacri?cing course in serving God. We can
apply this lesson to many situations, not just those that
involve life and death. For example, while many Christian parents have found it di?cult to see their children
leave home to serve Jehovah in distant assignments,
they are determined not to discourage them. Phyllis,
who lives in England, recalls how she felt when her only
daughter took up missionary service in Africa. “It was
an emotional time,” said Phyllis. “It was hard for me to
know that she would be so far away. I felt sad and proud
at the same time. I prayed a lot about it. But it was her
decision, and I never tried to alter that. After all, I had
always taught her to put Kingdom interests ?rst! She
has served in foreign assignments for the past 30 years,
and I thank Jehovah every day for her faithfulness.”
How ?ne it is when we encourage self-sacri?cing fellow
believers!
19. What valuable lesson do we learn from what happened to Paul?
“LET THE WILL OF JEHOVAH TAKE PLACE”

353

“The Brothers Received Us Gladly” (Acts 21:15-17)
20

Preparations were made, and Paul continued on

his way, accompanied by brothers who thus gave evidence of their wholehearted support. At every stage of
the journey to Jerusalem, Paul and those accompanying him sought the companionship of their Christian
brothers and sisters. At Tyre, they had found disciples
and had remained with them seven days. In Ptolemais,
they had greeted their sisters and brothers and had
spent one day with them. At Caesarea, they had stayed
for a number of days at the home of Philip. Next, some
of the disciples from Caesarea escorted Paul and his
companions to Jerusalem, where they were entertained
by Mnason, an early disciple. Finally, upon the travelers’ arrival in Jerusalem, Luke reports that “the brothers received us gladly.”—Acts 21:17.
21

Clearly, Paul wanted to be with those of like faith.

The apostle drew encouragement from his brothers and
sisters, just as we do today. Doubtless, that encouragement strengthened Paul to face the angry opposers who
would seek to put him to death.
20, 21. What illustrates Paul’s desire to be with the brothers, and why
did he want to be with those of like faith?
354

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

S E C T I O N 8 ? AC TS 21:18–28:31



“PREACHING THE KINGDOM
OF GOD . . . WITHOUT
HINDRANCE”
ACTS 28:31
In this section, we will follow Paul as he faces
angry mobs, endures imprisonments, and appears before the court of one Roman o?cial after
another. Through it all, the apostle continues
bearing witness about God’s Kingdom. As you
consider the exciting conclusion to the book of
Acts, ask yourself, ‘How can I imitate this bold
and zealous evangelizer?’

CHAPTER 23



“Hear My Defense”
Paul defends the truth
before angry mobs and the Sanhedrin
Based on Acts 21:18–23:10

JERUSALEM! Once again, Paul is walking along its
narrow, bustling streets. No city on earth is so
steeped in the history of Jehovah’s dealings with his
people. By and large, its inhabitants revel in that
glorious past. Paul knows that many Christians here
are putting too much stock in the past, failing to
progress with Jehovah’s advancing purposes. Paul
thus sees a case of spiritual need in addition to the
material need that moved him—back when he was
still in Ephesus—to decide to revisit this great city.
(Acts 19:21) Despite the prospect of danger, he has
held fast to his purpose.
2

What, now, will Paul face in Jerusalem? One

challenge will come from Christ’s followers, some
of whom are troubled by rumors about Paul. Great1, 2. What brings the apostle Paul to Jerusalem, and what challenges
will he face there?
356

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

er challenges will come from Christ’s enemies. They
will launch false accusations against Paul, beat
him, and threaten to kill him. These tumultuous
events will also give Paul an opportunity to make
a defense. His humility, courage, and faith in handling such challenges provide a sterling example for
Christians today. Let us see how.
3

“They B egan to Glorify God” (Acts 21:18-20a)
The day after their arrival in Jerusalem, Paul

and his companions went to see the responsible older men of the congregation. None of the surviving
apostles are mentioned in the account; perhaps by
then they had all left to serve in other parts of the
world. However, James the brother of Jesus was still
there. (Gal. 2:9) Likely, James presided at the meeting when “all the older men were present” with
Paul.—Acts 21:18.
4

Paul greeted the older men “and began giving in

detail an account of the things God did among the
nations through his ministry.” (Acts 21:19) We can
3-5. (a) What meeting did Paul attend in Jerusalem, and what was discussed? (b) What lessons may we draw from Paul’s meeting with the
elders in Jerusalem?
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

357

only imagine how encouraging that was. We today
are likewise thrilled to hear of the progress of the
work in other lands.—Prov. 25:25.
5

At some point, Paul likely mentioned the contri-

butions he had brought from Europe. The concern
manifested by the brothers in far-?ung places must
have warmed the hearts of Paul’s listeners. Why, in
response to Paul’s report, the record says: “They
[the older men] began to glorify God”! (Acts 21:20a)
Similarly, the hearts of many today who endure disasters or grievous sicknesses are deeply moved
when fellow believers o?er timely help and words
of encouragement.
Many Still “Zealous for the Law” (Acts 21:20b, 21)
6 The elders then revealed to Paul that there was a
problem in Judea that involved him personally. They
said: “You behold, brother, how many thousands of
believers there are among the Jews; and they are all
zealous for the Law. But they have heard it rumored
about you that you have been teaching all the Jews
among the nations an apostasy from Moses, telling
6. What problem did Paul learn about?
358

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

them neither to circumcise their children nor to walk
in the solemn customs.”1—Acts 21:20b, 21.
7

Why were so many Christians still zealous for the

Mosaic Law, well over 20 years after it had been abolished? (Col. 2:14) In 49 C.E. the apostles and older
men meeting in Jerusalem had sent a letter to the congregations explaining that believers from among the
nations did not need to submit to circumcision and
come under the Mosaic Law. (Acts 15:23-29) However,
that letter had not mentioned Jewish believers, many
of whom did not understand that the Mosaic Law no
longer applied.
8

Did that mistaken thinking disqualify such Jewish

believers from being Christians? No. It was not as if
they had once been worshippers of pagan gods and
were now continuing to follow the religious customs
of their former faith. The Law that was so important
to those Jewish believers had originally been given by
1 There must have been many congregations meeting in private
homes in order to care for the spiritual needs of such a large number of Jewish Christians.

7, 8. (a) What mistaken view did many Christians in Judea have?
(b) Why did the mistaken thinking of some Jewish Christians not amount
to apostasy?
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

359

Jehovah. Nothing in it was demonic or wrong in itself.
But that Law had to do with the old covenant, whereas Christians were now under the new covenant. The
observances of the Law covenant were now obsolete
as far as pure worship was concerned. Hebrew Christians who were zealous for the Law lacked understanding and con?dence in the Christian congregation.
They needed to bring their thinking into line with the
progressive revelation of truth.1—Jer. 31:31-34; Luke
22:20.
“There Is Nothing to the Rumors” (Acts 21:22-26)
9 What about the rumors stating that Paul was
teaching Jews among the nations “neither to circumcise their children nor to walk in the solemn customs”?
Paul was an apostle to the Gentiles, and to them he
upheld the decision that Gentiles did not have to submit to the Law. He also exposed the error of any who
1 A few years later, the apostle Paul wrote his letter to the Hebrews,
in which he proved the superiority of the new covenant. In that letter, he clearly demonstrated that the new covenant made the old
covenant obsolete. In addition to providing convincing arguments
that Jewish Christians could use to answer their Jewish detractors,
Paul’s powerful reasoning doubtless strengthened the faith of some
Christians who were putting too much emphasis on the Mosaic Law.
—Heb. 8:7-13.

9. What did Paul teach regarding the Mosaic Law?
360

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

tried to persuade Gentile believers to undergo circumcision as a sign of submission to the Mosaic Law. (Gal.
5:1-7) Paul also preached the good news to Jews in the
cities he visited. He certainly would have explained to
responsive ones that Jesus’ death had made the Law
obsolete and that righteousness was attained by faith,
not by works of Law.—Rom. 2:28, 29; 3:21-26.
10

Nevertheless, Paul showed understanding toward

those who felt comfortable observing some Jewish
customs, such as abstaining from work on the Sabbath
or avoiding certain foods. (Rom. 14:1-6) And he did
not set down rules about circumcision. Indeed, Paul
had Timothy circumcised so that the Jews would not
be suspicious of Timothy, whose father was a Greek.
(Acts 16:3) Circumcision was a matter for personal decision. Paul told the Galatians: “Neither circumcision
is of any value nor is uncircumcision, but faith operating through love is.” (Gal. 5:6) However, to get circumcised so as to come under the Law or to present
the practice as being necessary in order to obtain Jehovah’s approval would betray a lack of faith.
10. What balanced attitude did Paul have in matters pertaining to the
Law and circumcision?
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

361

11

Hence, although the rumors were gross distor-

tions, Jewish believers were still disturbed by them.
For that reason, the older men o?ered Paul this direction: “We have four men with a vow upon themselves. Take these men along and cleanse yourself
ceremonially with them and take care of their expenses, that they may have their heads shaved. And
so everybody will know that there is nothing to the
rumors they were told about you, but that you
are walking orderly, you yourself also keeping the
Law.”1—Acts 21:23, 24.
12

Paul could have objected that the real problem

was, not the rumors about him, but the zeal of those
1 Scholars suggest that the men had made a Nazirite vow. (Num. 6:
1-21) True, the Mosaic Law, under which such a vow would have
been made, was now obsolete. Still, Paul might have reasoned that
it would not be wrong for the men to ful?ll a vow made to Jehovah.
Therefore, it would not be wrong for him to pay their expenses and
accompany them. We do not know exactly what type of vow was
involved, but whatever it was, it is unlikely that Paul would have supported the o?ering of an animal sacri?ce (as Nazirites did), believing
that it would cleanse the men of sin. The perfect sacri?ce of Christ
had stripped such sacri?ces of any sin-atoning value. Whatever he
did, we can be sure that Paul would not have agreed to anything that
would have violated his conscience.

11. What counsel did the elders give Paul, and what would have been involved in carrying it out? (See also footnote.)
12. How did Paul show a ?exible and cooperative spirit in his response
to the counsel of the Jerusalem elders?
362

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Jewish believers for the Mosaic Law. But he was willing to be ?exible, as long as he did not have to compromise godly principles. Earlier he had written: “To
those under law I became as under law, though I myself am not under law, that I might gain those under
law.” (1 Cor. 9:20) On this occasion, Paul cooperated
with the Jerusalem elders and became “as under law.”
In so doing, he set a ?ne example for us today to cooperate with the elders and not insist on doing things
our own way.—Heb. 13:17.
“He Was Not Fit to Live!” (Acts 21:27–22:30)
13

Things did not go well at the temple. As the

days for the completion of the vows drew to a close,
Jews from Asia caught sight of Paul, falsely accused
him of bringing Gentiles into the temple, and incited a riot. If the Roman military commander had not
intervened, Paul would have been beaten to death.
As it was, the Roman commander took him into
custody. From that day, it would take more than
four years for Paul to regain his freedom. And
13. (a) Why did some Jews cause a tumult in the temple? (b) How was
Paul’s life saved?
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

363

the immediate danger to Paul was not yet over.
When the commander asked the Jews why they were
attacking Paul, they shouted di?erent accusations.
In the tumult, the commander could understand
nothing. Eventually, Paul had to be physically carried away from the scene. When Paul and the Roman soldiers were about to enter the soldiers’ quarters, Paul said to the commander: “I beg you, permit
me to speak to the people.” (Acts 21:39) The commander consented, and Paul went on to defend his
faith courageously.
14

“Hear my defense,” Paul began. (Acts 22:1) Paul

addressed the crowd in Hebrew, which quieted them
down. He gave a forthright explanation of why he was
now a follower of Christ. In doing so, Paul skillfully
mentioned points that the Jews could verify if they
wished. Paul had studied at the feet of the famous Gamaliel and had persecuted the followers of Christ, as
some present likely knew. However, on his way to Damascus, he had a vision of the resurrected Christ,
14, 15. (a) What did Paul explain to the Jews? (b) What steps did the
Roman commander take to learn the reason for the Jews’ anger?
364

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

who spoke to him. Paul’s traveling companions saw
a bright light and heard a voice, but they did not
“hear understandingly” the words. (Acts 9:7; 22:9, ftn.)
Afterward, the companions had to lead Paul, who was
blinded by the vision, into Damascus. There Ananias,
a man known to the Jews of that region, miraculously
restored Paul’s sight.
15

Paul went on to relate that after his return to Je-

rusalem, Jesus appeared to him in the temple. At this
point, the Jews became very disturbed, and they clamored: “Take such a man away from the earth, for he
was not ?t to live!” (Acts 22:22) To save Paul, the commander had him taken into the soldiers’ quarters. Determined to discover the reason for the Jews’ anger at
Paul, the commander ordered him to be prepared for
interrogation under scourging. Paul, though, took advantage of a legal protection at his disposal and revealed that he was a Roman citizen. Jehovah’s worshippers today have similarly used legal protections
available to them to defend the faith. (See the boxes “Roman Law and Roman Citizens,” on page 366,
and “Modern-Day Legal Battles,” on page 368.) On
hearing of Paul’s Roman citizenship, the commander
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

365

ROMAN LAW AND ROMAN CITIZENS



Roman authorities usually interfered little in local
government. Generally speaking, Jewish law governed Jewish a?airs. The Romans got involved in
Paul’s case only because the riot that erupted upon
his appearing in the temple was a threat to public
order.
The Roman authorities had considerable power
over ordinary provincial subjects. Things were different, however, when the authorities dealt with Roman citizens.1 Citizenship a?orded a person certain privileges that were recognized and honored
throughout the empire. It was illegal, for example, to bind or beat an uncondemned Roman, since
such treatment was considered ?t for slaves only.
Roman citizens also had the right to appeal the decisions of a provincial governor to the emperor, in
Rome.
Roman citizenship could be obtained in a number
of ways. The ?rst was by inheritance. Emperors occasionally awarded citizenship to individuals or to
the free populations of whole cities or districts for
services rendered. A slave who bought his freedom
1 In the ?rst century C.E., not many Roman citizens would have
lived in Judea. Only in the third century were all provincial subjects
given Roman citizenship.
366

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

from a Roman citizen, a slave who was set free by a
Roman, or a veteran of the auxiliary forces who was
discharged from the Roman army would himself become a Roman. Apparently, under certain circumstances it was also possible to purchase citizenship.
The military commander Claudius Lysias thus told
Paul: “I purchased these rights as a citizen for a
large sum of money.” Paul responded: “I was even
born in them.” (Acts 22:28) Hence, one of Paul’s
male ancestors must somehow have acquired Roman citizenship, although the circumstances remain
unknown.

realized that he would have to ?nd another way to get
more information. The next day, he brought Paul before a specially convened meeting of the Sanhedrin,
the supreme court of the Jews.
16

“I Am a Pharisee” (Acts 23:1-10)
Beginning his defense before the Sanhedrin,

Paul said: “Men, brothers, I have behaved before
God with a perfectly clear conscience down to this
day.” (Acts 23:1) He got no further. The record
16, 17. (a) Describe what happened when Paul addressed the Sanhedrin.
(b) When he was struck, how did Paul set an example of humility?
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

367

MODERN-DAY LEGAL BATTLES



Like the apostle Paul, Jehovah’s modern-day Witnesses have sought every legal recourse open to
them to combat restrictions imposed on their
preaching work. They have been zealous in “the defending and legally establishing of the good news.”
—Phil. 1:7.
During the 1920’s and 1930’s, hundreds were arrested for distributing Bible literature. For instance,
by 1926, there were 897 cases pending in German
courts. So much litigation was involved that it became necessary to establish a Legal Department at
the Germany branch. During the 1930’s, arrests for
house-to-house preaching in the United States alone
ran into the hundreds every year. In 1936, that number rose to 1,149. To provide needed counsel, a Legal Department was also established in the United
States. From 1933 to 1939, Witnesses in Romania
faced 530 lawsuits. However, appeals to the Romanian High Court won many favorable decisions.
Similar situations have developed in many other
lands.
Legal challenges have arisen when Christians
could not conscientiously agree to take part in activities that would violate their neutrality. (Isa. 2:
2-4; John 17:14) Opposers have falsely accused them
368

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

of sedition, which has sometimes resulted in a complete ban on their activities. Over the years, however, many governments have acknowledged that Jehovah’s Witnesses present no threat to them.1
1 For a discussion of the legal victories of Jehovah’s Witnesses in various lands, see chapter 30 of the book Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers
of God’s Kingdom.

says: “At this the high priest Ananias ordered those
standing by him to strike him on the mouth.” (Acts
23:2) What an insult! And what a revelation of prejudice, to brand Paul a liar before any evidence was
heard! No wonder Paul responded: “God is going to
strike you, you whitewashed wall. Do you at one and
the same time sit to judge me in accord with the
Law and, transgressing the Law, command me to be
struck?”—Acts 23:3.
17

Some standing by professed shock—not at the one

who struck Paul but at Paul’s reaction! They demanded: “Are you reviling the high priest of God?” In answer,
Paul gave them a lesson in humility and in respect for
the Law. He said: “Brothers, I did not know he was high
priest. For it is written, ‘You must not speak injuriously
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

369

of a ruler of your people.’ ”1 (Acts 23:4, 5; Ex. 22:28)
Paul now adopted a di?erent strategy. Taking note that
the Sanhedrin was made up of Pharisees and Sadducees, he said: “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of
Pharisees. Over the hope of the resurrection of the
dead I am being judged.”—Acts 23:6.
18

Why did Paul call himself a Pharisee? Because he

was “a son of Pharisees” from a family belonging to
that sect. Hence, many would still view him as such.2
How, though, could Paul associate himself with the
Pharisees’ belief in a resurrection? Reportedly, the
Pharisees believed that a conscious soul survived death
and that the souls of the righteous would live again in
human bodies. Paul did not believe such notions. He
believed in the resurrection as taught by Jesus. (John
1 Some have suggested that Paul had weak eyesight that prevented
him from recognizing the high priest. Or perhaps he had been absent from Jerusalem for so long that he could not identify the current
high priest. Or maybe Paul just could not see through the crowd who
it was that gave the order to strike him.
2 In 49 C.E., when the apostles and older men were discussing
whether Gentiles had to submit to the Mosaic Law, some among the
Christians present were identi?ed as “those of the sect of the Pharisees that had believed.” (Acts 15:5) Evidently, those believers were
still identi?ed in some sense with their Pharisaic background.

18. Why did Paul call himself a Pharisee, and how might we use similar reasoning in certain circumstances?
370

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

5:25-29) Still, Paul did agree with the Pharisees that
there was a hope of life beyond death—as opposed to
the Sadducees, who did not believe in a future life. We
might use similar reasoning when discussing matters
with Catholics or Protestants. We could say that like
them, we believe in God. Granted, they may believe in
the Trinity while we believe in the God of the Bible.
Still, we do share the belief that there is a God.
19

Paul’s statement split the Sanhedrin. The record

says: “There broke out a loud screaming, and some of
the scribes of the party of the Pharisees rose and
began contending ?ercely, saying: ‘We ?nd nothing
wrong in this man; but if a spirit or an angel spoke to
him,—.’ ” (Acts 23:9) The very suggestion that an angel might have spoken to Paul was anathema to the
Sadducees, who did not believe in angels! (See the box
“The Sadducees and the Pharisees,” on page 372.) The
tumult became so great that the Roman military commander once again rescued the apostle. (Acts 23:10)
Still, Paul was hardly out of danger. What would happen to the apostle now? We will learn more in the following chapter.
19. Why did the meeting of the Sanhedrin break up in disorder?
“HEAR MY DEFENSE”

371

THE SADDUCEES AND THE PHARISEES



The Sanhedrin, the national administrative council and high court of the Jews, was dominated by
two rival sects—the Sadducees and the Pharisees.
According to ?rst-century historian Flavius Josephus, the main di?erence between these parties was
that the Pharisees sought to impose a great number
of traditional observances on the people, whereas
the Sadducees considered obligatory only what was
found in the Law of Moses. Both schools of thought
were united in their opposition to Jesus.
It appears that the Sadducees, who were basically
conservative, had close ties to the priesthood and
that Annas and Caiaphas, both of whom had served
as the high priest, belonged to this powerful sect.
(Acts 5:17) Josephus says, however, that its teachings could “persuade none but the rich.”
The Pharisees, on the other hand, had great in?uence over the masses. Yet, their views, which included insistence on extreme ceremonial purity, made
observing the Law burdensome for the people. In
contrast with the Sadducees, the Pharisees attributed great importance to fate and believed that a soul
survived death, after which it received a just reward
or punishment for its virtues or its vices.
372

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 24



“Be of Good Courage!”
Paul escapes a plot on his life
and makes his defense before Felix
Based on Acts 23:11–24:27

SNATCHED from an angry mob in Jerusalem, Paul is
in custody once again. The zealous apostle is not surprised by the persecution he is facing here in Jerusalem. He was told to expect “bonds and tribulations” in
this city. (Acts 20:22, 23) And while not exactly certain
of what may lie ahead, Paul knows that he will continue to su?er for Jesus’ name.—Acts 9:16.
2

Even Christian prophets warned Paul that he would

be bound and delivered “into the hands of people of the
nations.” (Acts 21:4, 10, 11) Recently, a Jewish crowd
sought to kill him, and shortly thereafter, it seemed as
if he “would be pulled to pieces” by the members of the
Sanhedrin as they argued over him. Now the apostle is
a prisoner in the custody of Roman soldiers and facing
1, 2. Why is Paul not surprised by the persecution he is facing in Jerusalem?
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

373

more trials and accusations. (Acts 21:31; 23:10) Indeed,
the apostle Paul needs encouragement!
3

In this time of the end, we know that “all those de-

siring to live with godly devotion in association with
Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.” (2 Tim. 3:12)
From time to time, we too need encouragement to press
on in our preaching work. How grateful we are for the
timely, heartening words we receive through the publications and the meetings arranged by “the faithful
and discreet slave”! (Matt. 24:45) Jehovah has assured
us that no enemies of the good news will succeed.
They will neither destroy his servants as a group nor
stop their preaching work. (Isa. 54:17; Jer. 1:19) What,
though, about the apostle Paul? Did he receive encouragement to continue bearing thorough witness despite
opposition? If so, what was it, and how did he respond?
Foiling an “O ath-B ound Conspiracy” (Acts 23:11-34)
4

The apostle Paul received much-needed encourage-

ment on the night following his rescue from the Sanhe3. From where do we receive encouragement to press on in our preaching work?
4, 5. What encouragement did Paul receive, and why was it timely?
374

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

drin. The inspired account tells us: “The Lord stood by
him and said: ‘Be of good courage! For as you have been
giving a thorough witness on the things about me in Jerusalem, so you must also bear witness in Rome.’ ”
(Acts 23:11) With those encouraging words from Jesus,
Paul was assured of deliverance. He knew that he would
survive to reach Rome and have the privilege of bearing witness to Jesus there.
5

The encouragement given Paul was timely. The very

next day, over 40 Jewish men “formed a conspiracy and
bound themselves with a curse, saying they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.” This
“oath-bound conspiracy” showed just how determined
those Jews were to murder the apostle. If they did not
succeed in carrying out their plot, the end result, they
believed, would be a curse, or an evil, to them. (Acts
23:12-15) Their plan, sanctioned by the chief priests and
older men, was to have Paul brought back to the Sanhedrin for further questioning, as if to ascertain matters concerning him more accurately. But en route, the
conspirators would be lying in wait to pounce on Paul
and kill him.
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

375

6

Paul’s nephew, however, heard of this plot and re-

ported it to Paul. In turn, Paul had the young man report it to the Roman military commander Claudius
Lysias. (Acts 23:16-22) Surely Jehovah loves young ones
who, like this unnamed nephew of Paul, courageously
put the welfare of God’s people ahead of their own and
faithfully do whatever they can to promote Kingdom
interests.
7

Immediately upon being informed about the plot

against Paul, Claudius Lysias, who commanded 1,000
men, ordered that a military guard of 470—soldiers,
spearmen, and horsemen—be formed to leave Jerusalem that night and safely conduct Paul to Caesarea.
Once there, he was to be turned over to Governor Felix.1 Although Caesarea, the Roman administrative
capital of Judea, had a substantial number of Jewish
residents, it was populated mainly by Gentiles. The orderly conditions existing there contrasted with the situation that prevailed in Jerusalem, where many dis1 See the box “Felix—Procurator of Judea,” on page 377.

6. How was the plot to kill Paul uncovered, and what example may young
people today ?nd in this account?
7, 8. What arrangements did Claudius Lysias make for Paul’s safety?
376

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

FELIX—PRO CURATOR OF JUDEA



In about 52 C.E., Roman Emperor Claudius appointed one of his favorites, Antonius Felix, as procurator, or governor, of Judea. Like his brother Pallas, Felix was a freed slave of the emperor’s family.
The appointment of a freedman to the post of procurator with a military command was unprecedented.
Because of his brother’s in?uence with the emperor, Felix “believed that he could commit all kinds of
enormities with impunity,” states Roman historian
Tacitus. As procurator, Felix “practised every kind of
cruelty and lust, wielding the power of king with all
the instincts of a slave.” During his tenure as procurator, Felix married Drusilla, daughter of Herod
Agrippa I, after seducing her away from her husband.
Felix treated the apostle Paul in a corrupt and illegal
manner, considering him a likely source of a bribe.
Felix’s administration was so corrupt and oppressive that Emperor Nero recalled him in 58 C.E. A
deputation of Jews followed Felix to Rome to accuse
him of misgovernment, but Pallas reportedly saved
his brother from punishment.

played emotional religious prejudice and were involved
in riots. Caesarea was also the main headquarters of the
Roman military forces in Judea.
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

377

8

Complying with Roman law, Lysias sent a letter to

Felix outlining the case. Lysias mentioned that upon
learning that Paul was a Roman citizen, he had rescued
Paul from being “done away with” by the Jews. Lysias
stated that he did not ?nd Paul guilty of anything “deserving of death or bonds,” but because of a plot against
Paul, he was turning him over to Felix so that the governor could hear the accusers and render judgment on
the matter.—Acts 23:25-30.
9

Was Lysias truthful in what he wrote? Not entirely.

It seems that he was trying to present himself in the
most favorable light. He really had not come to Paul’s
rescue because he found out that the apostle was a Roman citizen. Additionally, Lysias failed to mention that
he had had Paul “bound with two chains” and had later given the order that he “be examined under scourging.” (Acts 21:30-34; 22:24-29) Lysias had thereby violated Paul’s rights as a Roman citizen. Today, Satan uses
the religious fanaticism of opposers to fan the ?ames
of persecution, and we may ?nd our civil liberties violated. But like Paul, God’s people can often take advan9. (a) How were Paul’s rights as a Roman citizen violated? (b) Why
might we take advantage of our rights as citizens of a country?
378

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

tage of the rights accorded them as citizens of a country and seek protection under the law.
“I Readily Speak in My Defense” (Acts 23:35–24:21)
10 In Caesarea, Paul was “kept under guard in the

praetorian palace of Herod” to await the arrival of the
accusers from Jerusalem. (Acts 23:35) Five days later, they came—High Priest Ananias, a public speaker
named Tertullus, and a group of older men. Tertullus
?rst praised Felix for what he was doing for the Jews,
evidently to ?atter him and gain his favor.1 Then, getting to the matter at hand, Tertullus referred to Paul as
“a pestilent fellow and stirring up seditions among
all the Jews throughout the inhabited earth and a
spearhead of the sect of the Nazarenes, one who also
tried to profane the temple and whom we seized.” The
other Jews “joined in the attack, asserting that these
things were so.” (Acts 24:5, 6, 9) Stirring up sedition,
1 Tertullus thanked Felix for the “great peace” he brought to the
nation. However, the truth was that less peace prevailed in Judea
during the time that Felix was governor than during any other administration up until the revolt against Rome. Also far from the
truth was the mention of “the greatest thankfulness” of the Jews for
reforms that Felix had made. In reality, Felix was despised by most
Jews for making their lives miserable and for his brutality in crushing their insurrections.—Acts 24:2, 3.

10. What serious accusations were leveled against Paul?
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

379

spearheading a dangerous sect, and profaning the temple—these were serious charges that could result in a
sentence of death.
11

Paul was then allowed to speak. “I readily speak in

my defense,” he began. He ?atly denied the accusations.
The apostle had not profaned the temple, nor had he
tried to stir up sedition. He pointed out that he had actually been absent from Jerusalem for “quite a number
of years” and had come with “gifts of mercy”—contributions for Christians whose poverty may have resulted from famine and persecution. Paul insisted that
before he entered the temple, he had been “ceremonially cleansed” and that he had conscientiously striven
to commit “no o?ense against God and men.”—Acts
24:10-13, 16-18.
12

Paul did admit, however, that he rendered sacred

service to the God of his forefathers “according to the
way that they call a ‘sect.’ ” But he insisted that he believed “all the things set forth in the Law and written
in the Prophets.” And as did his accusers, he held to the
hope of “a resurrection of both the righteous and the
11, 12. How did Paul refute the charges against him?
380

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

unrighteous.” Paul then challenged his accusers: “Let
the men here say for themselves what wrong they found
as I stood before the Sanhedrin, except with respect to
this one utterance which I cried out while standing
among them, ‘Over the resurrection of the dead I am
today being judged before you!’ ”—Acts 24:14, 15, 20, 21.
13

Paul set a good example for us to follow if we are

ever brought before secular authorities because of our
worship and are falsely accused of such things as being
rabble-rousers, seditionists, or members of a “dangerous sect.” Paul did not fawn over the governor, uttering words of ?attery as did Tertullus. Paul stayed calm
and respectful. Tactfully, he gave clear and truthful testimony. Paul mentioned that the “Jews from the district
of Asia” who had accused him of de?ling the temple
were not present and that legally, he should be able to
face them and hear their accusations.—Acts 24:18, 19.
14

Most strikingly, Paul did not hold back from giv-

ing testimony regarding his beliefs. Boldly, the apostle reiterated his belief in the resurrection, the issue
that had created such turmoil when he was before the
13-15. Why can we look to Paul as a good example of giving a bold witness before secular authorities?
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

381

Sanhedrin. (Acts 23:6-10) In his defense, Paul emphasized the resurrection hope. Why? Because Paul was
bearing witness to Jesus and to His resurrection from
the dead—something those opposers would not accept.
(Acts 26:6-8, 22, 23) Yes, it was the issue of the resurrection—and more precisely, belief in Jesus and in his
resurrection—on which the controversy was centered.
15

Like Paul, we can give a bold witness and can draw

strength from what Jesus told his disciples: “You will
be objects of hatred by all people on account of my
name. But he that has endured to the end is the one that
will be saved.” Must we worry about what we should
say? No, for Jesus gave this assurance: “When they are
leading you along to deliver you up, do not be anxious
beforehand about what to speak; but whatever is given
you in that hour, speak this, for you are not the ones
speaking, but the holy spirit is.”—Mark 13:9-13.
16

“Felix B ecame Frightened” (Acts 24:22-27)
This was not the ?rst time that Governor Felix had

heard about Christian beliefs. The account states: “Felix, knowing quite accurately the matters concerning
16, 17. (a) How did Felix handle Paul’s trial? (b) Why may Felix have
become frightened, yet for what reason did he continue to see Paul?
382

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

this Way [the term used to describe early Christianity],
began to put the men o? and said: ‘Whenever Lysias the
military commander comes down, I shall decide upon
these matters involving you.’ And he ordered the army
o?cer that the man be kept and have some relaxation
of custody, and that he forbid no one of his people to
wait upon him.”—Acts 24:22, 23.
17

Some days later, Felix, with his wife Drusilla, a Jew-

ess, sent for Paul and “listened to him on the belief in
Christ Jesus.” (Acts 24:24) However, when Paul spoke
about “righteousness and self-control and the judgment to come, Felix became frightened,” possibly because such things troubled his conscience on account
of the wicked course he had pursued in his own life. So
he dismissed Paul, saying: “For the present go your way,
but when I get an opportune time I shall send for you
again.” Felix did see Paul many times after that, not because he wanted to learn the truth, but because he
hoped that Paul would give him a bribe.—Acts 24:
25, 26.
18

Why did Paul speak to Felix and his wife about

18. Why did Paul speak to Felix and his wife about “righteousness and
self-control and the judgment to come”?
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

383

“righteousness and self-control and the judgment to
come”? Remember, they wanted to know what “belief
in Christ Jesus” entailed. Paul, who knew their background of immorality, cruelty, and injustice, was making plain what was required of all who would become
Jesus’ followers. What Paul said showed the stark contrast between God’s standards of righteousness and the
life course that Felix and his wife pursued. This should
have helped them to see that all humans are accountable to God for what they think, say, and do and that
more important than the judgment to be rendered with
respect to Paul was the judgment that they faced before
God. No wonder Felix “became frightened”!
19

In our ministry, we may ?nd people who are like

Felix. At ?rst they might appear to show interest in the
truth, but they are really seeking their own sel?sh
course. We rightfully remain wary of such ones. Yet,
like Paul, we can tactfully tell them of God’s righteous
standards. Perhaps the truth will touch their hearts.
However, if it becomes evident that they have no inten19, 20. (a) In our ministry, how should we deal with people who appear
to be interested but who are really seeking their own sel?sh course?
(b) How do we know that Felix was no friend to Paul?
384

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

tion of abandoning a sinful course, we leave them alone
and search out those who really are seeking the truth.
20

In the case of Felix, his true heart condition was re-

vealed in these words: “When two years had elapsed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and because Felix
desired to gain favor with the Jews, he left Paul bound.”
(Acts 24:27) Felix was no real friend to Paul. Felix knew
that followers of “The Way” were neither seditionists nor
revolutionaries. (Acts 19:23) He also knew that Paul had
not violated any Roman law. Yet, Felix kept the apostle
in custody in order to “gain favor with the Jews.”
21

As shown in the last verse of Acts chapter 24, Paul

was still a prisoner when Porcius Festus succeeded Felix as governor. Thus began a series of hearings, and
Paul was handed over from one o?cial to another. Truly, this courageous apostle was “haled before kings and
governors.” (Luke 21:12) As we will see, he would later
give a witness to the most powerful ruler of his day.
Through it all, Paul never wavered in his faith. No
doubt he continued to draw strength from Jesus’ words:
“Be of good courage!”
21. What happened to Paul after Porcius Festus became governor, and
from what did Paul no doubt continue to draw strength?
“BE OF GOOD COURAGE!”

385

CHAPTER 25



“I Appeal to Caesar!”
Paul sets an example
in defending the good news
Based on Acts 25:1–26:32

PAUL remains under heavy guard in Caesarea. Two
years earlier when he had returned to Judea, within
days the Jews had tried to kill him at least three times.
(Acts 21:27-36; 23:10, 12-15, 27) Till now, his enemies
have been unsuccessful, but they do not give up. When
Paul sees that he may yet fall into their hands, he tells
Roman Governor Festus: “I appeal to Caesar!”Acts
25:11.
2

Did Jehovah support Paul’s decision to appeal to

the emperor of Rome? The answer is important to us,
who are bearing thorough witness about God’s Kingdom in this time of the end. We need to know whether Paul set a pattern for us to follow “in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.”—Phil.
1:7.
1, 2. (a) In what circumstances does Paul ?nd himself? (b) What question arises regarding Paul’s appeal to Caesar?
386

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“Standing B efore the Judgment S eat” (Acts 25:1-12)
3 Three days after taking o?ce, Festus, the new Roman governor of Judea, went to Jerusalem.1 There he
listened as the chief priests and the principal men of
the Jews accused Paul of serious crimes. They knew
that the new governor was under pressure to keep
peace with them and all the Jews. So they asked a favor
of Festus: Bring Paul to Jerusalem, and try him there.
However, there was a dark plan behind this request.
Those enemies were scheming to kill Paul on the
road from Caesarea to Jerusalem. Festus turned them
down, saying: “Let those who are in power among you
. . . come down with me [to Caesarea] and accuse him,
if there is anything out of the way about the man.”
(Acts 25:5) Therefore, Paul escaped death yet another
time.
4

During all of Paul’s trials, Jehovah through the

Lord Jesus Christ sustained him. Recall that in a vision, Jesus told his apostle: “Be of good courage!”
1See the box “Roman Procurator Porcius Festus,” on page 388.

3, 4. (a) What was behind the Jews’ request to have Paul brought to Jerusalem, and how did he escape death? (b) How does Jehovah sustain his
modern-day servants, as he did Paul?
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

387

ROMAN PRO CURATOR P ORCIUS FESTUS



Our only ?rsthand information about Porcius Festus comes from Acts of Apostles and the writings of
Flavius Josephus. Festus succeeded Felix as procurator of Judea in about 58 C.E. and evidently died
in o?ce after governing just two or three years.
For the most part, Festus appears to have been a
prudent and capable procurator, in contrast with his
predecessor, Felix, and his successor, Albinus. At
the beginning of Festus’ time in o?ce, Judea was
plagued by bandits. According to Josephus, “Festus
. . . made it his business to correct those that made
disturbances in the country. So he caught the greatest part of the robbers, and destroyed a great many
of them.” During his tenure, the Jews built a wall to
prevent King Agrippa from observing what took
place in the temple area. Festus initially ordered
them to dismantle it. At the Jews’ request, however,
he later allowed them to present the matter to the
Roman Emperor Nero.
Festus appears to have taken a ?rm stand against
criminals and insurgents. But in his desire to maintain good relations with the Jews, he was willing to
set aside justice—at least in his dealings with the
apostle Paul.
388

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

(Acts 23:11) Today, God’s servants also face obstacles and threats. Jehovah does not shield us
from every di?culty, but he gives us the wisdom
and strength to endure. We can always count on
“the power beyond what is normal” that our loving
God provides.—2 Cor. 4:7.
5

Some days later, Festus “sat down on the judgment

seat” in Caesarea.1 Before him stood Paul and Paul’s
accusers. In answer to their baseless charges, Paul
countered: “Neither against the Law of the Jews nor
against the temple nor against Caesar have I committed any sin.” The apostle was innocent and deserved
to be freed. How would Festus decide? Wanting to gain
favor with the Jews, he asked Paul: “Do you wish to go
up to Jerusalem and be judged there before me concerning these things?” (Acts 25:6-9) What an absurd
proposal! If Paul were remanded to Jerusalem, his accusers would become his judges and he would face
1 “The judgment seat” was a chair placed on a dais. The elevated
position was viewed as giving weight and ?nality to the judge’s rulings. Pilate sat on a judgment seat when he weighed the charges
against Jesus.

5. How did Festus deal with Paul?
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

389

certain death. In this instance, Festus was choosing
political expediency over true justice. An earlier governor, Pontius Pilate, had acted similarly in a case involving an even more important prisoner. (John 19:1216) Modern-day judges may also give in to political
pressure. Therefore, we should not be surprised when
courts decide contrary to evidence in cases involving
God’s people.
6

Festus’ desire to indulge the Jews could have put

Paul in mortal danger. Therefore, Paul used a right he
possessed as a Roman citizen. He told Festus: “I am
standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I
ought to be judged. I have done no wrong to the Jews,
as you also are ?nding out quite well. . . . I appeal to
Caesar!” Once made, such an appeal was usually irrevocable. Festus emphasized this, saying: “To Caesar you
have appealed; to Caesar you shall go.” (Acts 25:10-12)
By appealing to a higher legal authority, Paul set a
precedent for true Christians today. When opposers
try to frame “trouble by decree,” Jehovah’s Witnesses
6, 7. Why did Paul appeal to Caesar, and what precedent did he thereby set for true Christians today?
390

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

avail themselves of legal provisions to defend the good
news.1—Ps. 94:20.
7

Thus, after over two years of incarceration for

crimes he did not commit, Paul was granted the opportunity to present his case in Rome. Before his departure, however, another ruler wanted to see him.
“I Did Not B ecome Disobedient” (Acts 25:13–26:23)
8 Some days after Festus heard Paul’s appeal to Caesar, King Agrippa and his sister Bernice paid “a visit
of courtesy” to the new governor.2 In Roman times, it
was customary for o?cials to make such visits to newly appointed governors. By congratulating Festus on
his appointment, Agrippa was undoubtedly trying to
cement political and personal ties that could be useful in the future.—Acts 25:13.
9

Festus told the king about Paul, and Agrippa was

intrigued. The next day, the two rulers sat down on
the judgment seat. But their power and pomp were
by no means more impressive than the words that
1 See the box “Appealing on Behalf of True Worship in Modern
Times,” on page 392.
2 See the box “King Herod Agrippa II,” on page 394.

8, 9. Why did King Agrippa visit Caesarea?
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

391

APPEALING ON BEHALF OF
TRUE WORSHIP IN MODERN TIMES

Jehovah’s Witnesses have at times appealed to high
courts in hopes of removing obstacles to the preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom. Here are two
examples.
On March 28, 1938, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned state court decisions and exonerated a group
of Witnesses who had been arrested for distributing
Bible literature in Gri?n, Georgia, U.S.A. This was
the ?rst of many appeals made to that high court regarding the right of the Witnesses to preach the good
news.1
Another case involved a Witness in Greece named
Minos Kokkinakis. Over a period of 48 years, he was
arrested more than 60 times for “proselytism.” On 18
occasions, he faced prosecution in court. He spent
years in prison and in exile on remote islands in the
Aegean Sea. After his last conviction in 1986, Brother Kokkinakis lost his appeals to the higher courts of
Greece. He then sought relief through the European
Court of Human Rights (ECHR). On May 25, 1993,
that Court ruled that Greece had violated Brother Kokkinakis’ freedom of religion.
1 For a more recent example, see the account of the U.S. Supreme
Court’s decision regarding free speech, which was published in Awake!
January 8, 2003, pages 3-11.
392

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Jehovah’s Witnesses have appealed to the ECHR
for relief in dozens of cases, prevailing in most of
them. No other organization, religious or otherwise,
has had such success in defending basic human rights
before the ECHR.
Do others bene?t from the legal victories of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Scholar Charles C. Haynes wrote:
“We all owe the Jehovah’s Witnesses a debt of gratitude. No matter how many times they’re insulted, run
out of town or even physically attacked, they keep on
?ghting for their (and thus our) freedom of religion.
And when they win, we all win.”

the prisoner before them was about to speak.—Acts
25:22-27.
10

Paul respectfully thanked King Agrippa for the

opportunity to present a defense to him, acknowledging that the king was an expert on all the customs as
well as the controversies among Jews. Paul then described his past life: “According to the strictest sect of
our form of worship I lived a Pharisee.” (Acts 26:5)
As a Pharisee, Paul had hoped in the coming of the
10, 11. How did Paul accord Agrippa respect, and what details about
Paul’s own past did the apostle reveal to the king?
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

393

KING HEROD AGRIPPA II



The Agrippa referred to in Acts chapter 25 was
King Herod Agrippa II, great-grandson of Herod
the Great and son of the Herod who had attacked
the Jerusalem congregation 14 years earlier. (Acts
12:1) Agrippa was the last of the Herodian princes.
At the death of his father in 44 C.E., 17-year-old
Agrippa was in Rome, where he was being educated at the court of Roman Emperor Claudius. The
emperor’s advisers considered Agrippa too young to
inherit his father’s domain; thus, a Roman governor
was appointed instead. Even so, according to Flavius
Josephus, while Agrippa was still in Rome, he intervened for the Jews and represented their interests.
In about 50 C.E., Claudius assigned Agrippa kingship over Chalcis and in 53 C.E., over Ituraea,
Trachonitis, and Abilene. Agrippa was also given
oversight of Jerusalem’s temple, with authority to
appoint the Jewish high priests. Claudius’ successor
Nero extended Agrippa’s realm to include parts of
Galilee and Perea. At the time of his meeting Paul,
Agrippa was in Caesarea with his sister Bernice,
who had left her husband, the king of Cilicia.—Acts
25:13.
In 66 C.E., when Agrippa’s e?orts failed to calm
the Jewish rebellion against Rome, he himself be394

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

came a target of the rebels, and he was left no choice
but to join the Romans. After the Jewish revolt was
crushed, a new emperor, Vespasian, gave Agrippa
further territories as a reward.

Messiah. Now, as a Christian, he boldly identi?ed Jesus Christ as that long-awaited one. A belief that
he and his accusers had in common—that is, the
hope of the ful?llment of God’s promise to their forefathers—was the reason that Paul was on trial that
day. This situation left Agrippa even more interested
in what Paul had to say.1
11

Recalling his past outrageous treatment of

Christians, Paul said: “I, for one, really thought
within myself I ought to commit many acts of opposition against the name of Jesus the Nazarene . . .
Since I was extremely mad against them [the followers of Christ], I went so far as to persecuting
them even in outside cities.” (Acts 26:9-11) Paul was
not exaggerating. Many people knew of the violence
he had done to the Christians. (Gal. 1:13, 23) ‘What
1 As a Christian, Paul accepted Jesus as the Messiah. The Jews, who
rejected Jesus, viewed Paul as an apostate.—Acts 21:21, 27, 28.
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

395

could have changed such a man?’ Agrippa may have
wondered.
12

Paul’s next words provided the answer: “As I was

journeying to Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests, I saw at midday on the
road, O king, a light beyond the brilliance of the sun
?ash from heaven about me and about those journeying with me. And when we had all fallen to the ground
I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew language,
‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? To keep kicking against the goads makes it hard for you.’ But I said,
‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus,
whom you are persecuting.’”1—Acts 26:12-15.
13

Before this supernatural event, Paul had ?gura-

tively been “kicking against the goads.” Just as a beast
of burden would injure itself unnecessarily by kicking
against the sharp end of an oxgoad, Paul had hurt himself spiritually by resisting the will of God. By appear1 Regarding Paul’s words that he was journeying “at midday,” one
Bible scholar noted: “Unless a traveller was in a really desperate hurry he rested during the midday heat. So we see how Paul was driving
himself on this mission of persecution.”

12, 13. (a) How did Paul describe his conversion? (b) How had Paul
been “kicking against the goads”?
396

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ing to Paul on the road to Damascus, the resurrected
Jesus caused this sincere but clearly misguided man
to change his thinking.—John 16:1, 2.
14

Paul did indeed make drastic changes in his life.

Addressing Agrippa, he said: “I did not become disobedient to the heavenly sight, but both to those in
Damascus ?rst and to those in Jerusalem, and over all
the country of Judea, and to the nations I went bringing the message that they should repent and turn to
God by doing works that be?t repentance.” (Acts 26:
19, 20) For years, Paul had been ful?lling the commission that Jesus Christ had given him in that midday
vision. With what results? Those who responded to the
good news that Paul preached repented of their immoral, dishonest conduct and turned to God. Such
ones became good citizens, contributing to and showing respect for law and order.
15

Those bene?ts, however, meant nothing to Paul’s

Jewish opposers. Paul said: “On account of these
things Jews seized me in the temple and attempted to
slay me. However, because I have obtained the help
14, 15. What did Paul say regarding the changes that he had made in
his life?
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

397

that is from God I continue to this day bearing witness to both small and great.”—Acts 26:21, 22.
16

As true Christians, we must be “always ready to

make a defense” of our faith. (1 Pet. 3:15) When speaking to judges and rulers about our beliefs, we may ?nd
it helpful to imitate the method Paul used in speaking
to Agrippa and Festus. By respectfully telling them
how Bible truths have changed lives for the better
—our own life as well as the lives of those who respond to our message—we may touch the hearts of
these high o?cials.
“You Would Persuade Me to B ecome a Christian”
(Acts 26:24-32)
17 As they listened to Paul’s persuasive testimony,
the two rulers could not remain detached. Note what
took place: “Now as [Paul] was saying these things in
his defense, Festus said in a loud voice: ‘You are going
mad, Paul! Great learning is driving you into madness!’” (Acts 26:24) Festus’ outburst may have be16. How may we imitate Paul when speaking to judges and rulers about
our beliefs?
17. How did Festus react to Paul’s defense, and what similar attitude is
seen today?
398

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

trayed an attitude seen even today. To many people,
those who teach what the Bible really says are fanatics. Worldly-wise ones often ?nd it hard to accept the
Bible teaching of the resurrection of the dead.
18

But Paul had a reply for the governor: “I am not

going mad, Your Excellency Festus, but I am uttering
sayings of truth and of soundness of mind. In reality,
the king to whom I am speaking with freeness of
speech well knows about these things . . . Do you,
King Agrippa, believe the Prophets? I know you believe.” Agrippa responded: “In a short time you would
persuade me to become a Christian.” (Acts 26:25-28)
These words, sincere or not, show that Paul’s witness
had a profound e?ect on the king.
19

Then Agrippa and Festus stood, signaling an end

to the audience. “As they withdrew they began talking
with one another, saying: ‘This man practices nothing
deserving death or bonds.’ Moreover, Agrippa said to
Festus: ‘This man could have been released if he had
not appealed to Caesar.’” (Acts 26:31, 32) They knew
18. How did Paul respond to Festus, leading to what response from
Agrippa?
19. What decision did Festus and Agrippa make regarding Paul?
“I APPEAL TO CAESAR!”

399

that an innocent man had stood before them. Perhaps
they would now look with greater favor on Christians.
20

Neither of the powerful rulers in this account seems

to have accepted the good news of God’s Kingdom. Was
there wisdom in the apostle Paul’s appearing before
those men? The answer is yes. Paul’s “being haled before
kings and governors” in Judea resulted in a witness
reaching areas of the Roman government that might
then have been inaccessible. (Luke 21:12, 13) Also, his
experiences and faithfulness under trial encouraged his
brothers and sisters in the faith.—Phil. 1:12-14.
21

The same is true today. By pressing on with the

Kingdom work despite trials and opposition, we may
see a number of positive results. We may give a witness to o?icials who might otherwise be di?icult to
reach. Our faithful endurance may be a source of encouragement to our Christian brothers and sisters,
moving them to show even greater boldness in the
work of bearing thorough witness about God’s Kingdom.
20. What results did Paul’s witness to high o?cials produce?
21. By pressing on with the Kingdom work, what positive results may
we see?
400

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 26



“Not a Soul of You Will Be Lost”
Paul faces shipwreck,
showing great faith and love for people
Based on Acts 27:1–28:10

PAUL turns the words over in his mind, for they will
have a great bearing on his future. “To Caesar you
shall go,” Governor Festus had said. Paul has spent
two years cooped up in prison, so the long trip to
Rome will, at the least, bring a change of scenery.
(Acts 25:12) However, Paul’s many vivid memories of
sea voyages involve far more than refreshing breezes
and open horizons. The prospect of this voyage to appear before Caesar may also raise a number of grave
questions in Paul’s mind.
2

Paul has been “in dangers at sea” many times, hav-

ing survived three shipwrecks, even spending a night
and a day in the open sea. (2 Cor. 11:25, 26) Furthermore, this trip will be quite unlike the missionary
1, 2. What kind of voyage is Paul facing, and what might be some of
his concerns?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

401

journeys he has taken as a free man. Paul will be traveling as a prisoner and over a tremendous distance
—some 2,000 miles from Caesarea to Rome. Can he
survive such a voyage unscathed? Even if he can, is he
sailing toward his own doom? Remember, he faces
the judgment of the mightiest secular power in Satan’s
world at that time.
3

After all that you have read about Paul, do you

think that he gave in to hopelessness and despair over
the prospect before him? Hardly! He knew that hardships lay ahead, but he did not know what form his
troubles would take. Why should he bury the joy of
his ministry under a load of anxiety about things he
could not control? (Matt. 6:27, 34) Paul knew that Jehovah’s will for him was that he use every occasion to
preach the good news of God’s Kingdom, even to secular rulers. (Acts 9:15) Paul was determined to live up
to his commission, come what may. Is that not our determination as well? So let us follow Paul on this historic voyage as we weigh the practical value of his example.
3. What was Paul’s determination, and what will we discuss in this chapter?
402

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

4

“The Winds Were Contrary” (Acts 27:1-7a)
Paul and some other prisoners were entrusted to

the care of a Roman o?cer named Julius, who chose
to board a merchant ship that had arrived at Caesarea. The ship had come from Adramyttium, a port on
the west coast of Asia Minor, across from the city of
Mitylene on the island of Lesbos. This ship would sail
north and then westward, making stops to unload and
take on cargo. Such vessels were not out?tted for passenger comfort, especially not for prisoners. (See the
box “Sea Travel and Trade Routes.”) Thankfully, Paul
would not be the only Christian among a group of
criminals. At least two fellow believers accompanied
him—Aristarchus and Luke. It was Luke, of course,
who penned the account. We do not know whether
these two loyal companions paid for their passage or
acted as servants to Paul.—Acts 27:1, 2.
5

After spending one day at sea and traveling about

70 miles north, the ship docked at Sidon, on the Syrian coast. Apparently Julius did not treat Paul as an
4. On what kind of vessel did Paul begin his voyage, and who were his
companions?
5. What fellowship was Paul able to enjoy at Sidon, and what may we
learn from this?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

403

SEA TRAVEL AND TRADE ROUTES



In the ancient world, ships were principally used
to transport cargo, not to accommodate passengers.
Travelers who wanted to make a voyage had to look
for a merchant vessel that was about to sail in the
desired direction, haggle over the price of passage,
and then wait until the ship sailed.
Thousands of vessels crisscrossed the Mediterranean to transport foodstu?s and other merchandise. Many who secured passage on such ships
would have to sleep on deck, perhaps under a tentlike shelter that they themselves erected at night
and dismantled each morning. They would also have
to take with them all that they needed for the journey, including food and bedding.
The duration of voyages depended entirely on the
winds. Because of inclement weather during the
winter, navigation was generally considered closed
from mid-November to mid-March.

ordinary criminal, possibly because Paul was a Roman
citizen who had not been proved guilty. (Acts 22:27,
28; 26:31, 32) Julius let Paul go ashore to see fellow
Christians. How the brothers and sisters must have
404

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

enjoyed caring for the apostle after his long imprisonment! Can you think of occasions when you might be
able to provide similar loving hospitality and be upbuilt in return?—Acts 27:3.
6

Putting out to sea from Sidon, the ship then con-

tinued up the coast and past Cilicia, near Paul’s hometown, Tarsus. Luke does not mention other stops, although he includes the ominous detail that “the winds
were contrary.” (Acts 27:4, 5) Still, we can envision
Paul seizing every opportunity to share the good news.
Surely he witnessed to fellow prisoners and others on
board, including the crew and the soldiers, as well as
to people at any of the ports where the ship docked.
Do we today likewise make good use of the opportunities to preach that are open to us?
7

In time, the ship reached Myra, a port on the

southern coast of Asia Minor. There Paul and others
had to change to another vessel, which would take
them to Rome, their ?nal destination. (Acts 27:6) In
those days, Egypt was a granary for Rome, and Egyptian grain ships docked at Myra. Julius located such
6-8. How did Paul’s journey progress from Sidon to Cnidus, and what
opportunities did Paul likely seize with regard to preaching?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

405

a ship and had the soldiers and prisoners board. This
vessel must have been much larger than the ?rst ship.
It carried a valuable cargo of wheat as well as 276 people—the crew, the soldiers, the prisoners, and likely
others heading to Rome. Clearly, with this change of
ships, Paul’s witnessing territory expanded, and he undoubtedly took advantage of that situation.
8

The next stop was Cnidus, on the southwest cor-

ner of Asia Minor. With favorable winds, a ship could
cover that distance in about a day. Yet, Luke reports
that they were “sailing on slowly quite a number of
days and coming to Cnidus with di?culty.” (Acts
27:7a) Sailing conditions had deteriorated. (See the
box “The Contrary Winds of the Mediterranean,” on
page 408.) Think of the people on board as the ship
bucked the strong winds and rough waters.
“Violently Tossed With the Tempest” (Acts 27:7b-26)
9 The ship’s captain planned to continue westward
from Cnidus, but eyewitness Luke says that “the wind
did not let us.” (Acts 27:7b) As the ship moved away
from the mainland, it lost the shore current, and then
9, 10. What di?culties arose in the vicinity of Crete?
406

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

a powerful adverse wind from the northwest pushed it
southward, perhaps at great speed. Just as the island
of Cyprus had earlier sheltered the coastal vessel from
contrary winds, this time, the island of Crete did so.
Once the ship passed the promontory of Salmone at
the east end of Crete, things improved a bit. Why? The
ship came to be on the lee, or southern, side of the island, so there was some protection from the powerful
winds. Imagine the relief that those on board must
have felt—at ?rst! But as long as the ship was at sea,
the crew could not ignore the approach of winter.
They had cause for concern.
10

Luke states with precision: “Coasting along

[Crete] with di?culty we came to a certain place called
Fair Havens.” Even in the shelter of the landmass, it
was hard to control the ship. At last, though, they
found an anchorage in a small bay that is thought to
lie in the region just before the coast turns northward.
How long did they remain there? Luke says a “considerable time,” but time was not in their favor. In
September/October, navigation was more hazardous.
—Acts 27:8, 9.
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

407

THE CONTRARY WINDS OF THE
MEDITERRANEAN

The wind and the season greatly a?ected where
and when ancient merchant ships sailed the Mediterranean, or the Great Sea. On the sea’s eastern
end, the wind usually blew from west to east during
midyear. This made sailing eastward easier, as Paul
experienced while returning from his third missionary tour. He and his companions were on a ship that
left Miletus, passed Rhodes, and docked at Patara.
It was almost a straight run from there to Tyre, on
the coast of Phoenicia. Luke writes that they passed
Cyprus on their left, meaning that they sailed to the
south of Cyprus.—Acts 21:1-3.
What about sailing in the opposite direction,
going westward? Ships might move westward along
a similar route if the wind permitted. But sometimes
that was virtually impossible. “In winter,” states The
International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, “the atmosphere is much less stable and powerful cyclones
move eastward across the Mediterranean bringing
with them strong winds, sometimes of gale force,
and often torrential rain or even snow.” Under such
conditions, the hazards were great.
In almost any season, vessels close to shore could
move northward up the coast of Palestine and con408

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

tinue westward by Pamphylia. On the latter stretch,
breezes from the mainland and west-?owing currents could help ships. That was the case with
the vessel on which prisoner Paul made the ?rst
leg of his trip to Rome. Yet, the winds could turn
“contrary.” (Acts 27:4) The grain ship that ?gured
prominently in Luke’s account may have sailed
north from Egypt and then around into the protected waters between Cyprus and Asia Minor. From
Myra, the captain intended to keep going westward
—around the tip of Greece and up the west coast of
Italy. (Acts 27:5, 6) However, the wind and the season held something else in store for that voyage!
11

Some passengers may have sought Paul’s advice

because of his experience in traveling the Mediterranean. He recommended that the ship not sail on. If
it did, there would be “damage and great loss,” maybe
even loss of life. However, the pilot and the shipowner
wanted to keep going, possibly feeling it urgent to ?nd
a safer location. They convinced Julius, and the majority felt that they should try to reach Phoenix, a port
farther along the coast. It may have had a larger and
11. Paul gave his shipmates what advice, yet what decision was made?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

409

better harbor in which to spend the winter. So when
a deceptively soft breeze from the south blew, the ship
departed.—Acts 27:10-13.
12

Then came more trouble: a “tempestuous wind”

from the northeast. For a time, they found shelter behind a “small island called Cauda” some 40 miles from
Fair Havens. Still, the ship was in danger of being driven southward until it would crash on the sandbanks
o? the coast of Africa. Frantic to avoid that end, the
sailors pulled in the small boat that the ship was towing. They struggled to perform the task, for the ski?
was likely full of water. Then they labored to undergird the large ship, passing ropes or chains under it to
hold its planks together. And they lowered its gear, the
mainsail or rigging, and strained to keep the ship
headed into the wind to weather the storm. Imagine
how terrifying this experience must have been! Even
these measures were not enough, as the ship continued to be “violently tossed with the tempest.” On the
third day, they heaved the tackling overboard, probably to recover buoyancy.—Acts 27:14-19.
12. After leaving Crete, the ship faced what dangers, and how did the
crew attempt to stave o? disaster?
410

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

13

Terror must have reigned. But Paul and his com-

panions were of good courage. The Lord had previously assured Paul that the apostle would bear witness in
Rome, and an angel later con?rmed this promise.
(Acts 19:21; 23:11) Nevertheless, night and day for two
weeks, the driving storm kept on. Because of unrelenting rain and a thick cloud cover that blocked out the
sun and stars, the pilot could not make sightings to determine the ship’s location or heading. Even a normal
meal would have been out of the question. How could
anyone think of eating, given the cold, rain, seasickness, and fear?
14

Paul stood up. He mentioned his earlier warn-

ing but not as if to say, ‘I told you so.’ Rather, the
unfolding of events was proof that his words were
well worth heeding. Then he said: “Now I recommend to you to be of good cheer, for not a soul of
you will be lost, only the boat will.” (Acts 27:
21, 22) How those words must have warmed the
13. What must life have been like aboard Paul’s ship during the storm?
14, 15. (a) In speaking to his shipmates, why did Paul mention his earlier warning? (b) What may we learn from the hopeful message that Paul
delivered?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

411

hearts of his listeners! Paul would have been intensely pleased, too, that Jehovah had given him
such a hopeful message to share. It is vital that we
remember that Jehovah cares about every human
life. Each person matters to him. The apostle Peter
wrote: “Jehovah . . . does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”
(2 Pet. 3:9) How urgent it is, then, that we endeavor to share Jehovah’s message of hope with as
many people as possible! Precious lives are at stake.
15

Likely Paul had been witnessing to many on the

ship about “the hope of the promise that was made by
God.” (Acts 26:6; Col. 1:5) Now, with shipwreck probable, Paul could o?er a powerful basis for a more immediate hope. He said: “This night there stood near
me an angel . . . , saying, ‘Have no fear, Paul. You must
stand before Caesar, and, look! God has freely given
you all those sailing with you.’ ” Paul urged them:
“Therefore be of good cheer, men; for I believe God
that it will be exactly as it has been told me. However,
we must be cast ashore on a certain island.”—Acts
27:23-26.
412

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“All Were Brought S afely to Land” (Acts 27:27-44)
16 After two frightful weeks, during which the ship
was driven some 540 miles, the sailors sensed a
change, maybe hearing breakers. They let out anchors
from the stern to prevent drift and to direct the bow
toward land in case they could beach the ship. At that
point, they attempted to leave the ship but were prevented from doing so by the soldiers. Paul told the
army o?cer and the soldiers: “Unless these men remain in the boat, you cannot be saved.” With the ship
now a bit steadier, Paul urged all to take a meal, assuring them again that they would survive. Paul then
“gave thanks to God before them all.” (Acts 27:31, 35)
In o?ering this appreciative prayer, he set an example
for Luke, Aristarchus, and Christians today. Are your
public prayers a source of encouragement and comfort
to others?
17

Following Paul’s prayer, “they all became cheerful

and themselves began taking some food.” (Acts 27:36)
They further lightened the ship by jettisoning the cargo of wheat, thus giving the ship a shallower draft for
16, 17. (a) Paul took what occasion to pray, and with what e?ect?
(b) How did Paul’s warning come to be ful?lled?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

413

its approach to the shore. When day arrived, the crew
cut away the anchors, unlashed the rudder oars at
the stern, and hoisted a small foresail so that they
would have some maneuverability as they ran the ship
aground. Then the front of the ship got stuck, perhaps
on a sandbar or in mud, and the stern started to break
apart under the crashing waves. Some soldiers wanted
to kill the prisoners so that none would escape, but
Julius intervened to prevent this. He urged all to swim
or ?oat to shore. What Paul had foretold came true
—all 276 survived. Yes, “all were brought safely to
land.” But where were they?—Acts 27:44.
“Extraordinary Human Kindness” (Acts 28:1-10)
18 It turned out that the survivors were on the island of Malta, south of Sicily. (See the box “Malta
—Where?”) The foreign-speaking people of the island
showed them “extraordinary human kindness.” (Acts
28:2) They made a ?re for these strangers who had
reached their shore drenched and shivering. The ?re
helped them to get warm despite the cold and rain. It
also gave rise to a miracle.
18-20. How did the people of Malta show “extraordinary human kindness,” and what miracle did God perform through Paul?
414

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

MALTA—WHERE?



Various islands have at times been suggested as
the “Malta” where Paul was shipwrecked. One theory singled out an island near Corfu, o? the western
coast of Greece. Another suggestion is based on
the word for “Malta” used in Acts. That Greek word
is Me·lite. Therefore, some have pointed to Melite Illyrica, now known as Mljet, located o? the coast of
Croatia, in the Adriatic Sea.
Granted, Acts 27:27 does mention “the sea of
Adria,” but in Paul’s day “Adria” applied to an area
larger than the present Adriatic Sea. It included the
Ionian Sea and waters east of Sicily and west of
Crete, thus encompassing the sea near modern-day
Malta.
The ship on which Paul traveled was forced southward from Cnidus to below Crete. In view of the prevailing winds in that storm, it is hardly likely that
the ship then turned and sailed as far northward as
Mljet or an island near Corfu. So a more likely location for Malta would be farther to the west. That
makes the island of Malta, south of Sicily, the probable location where the shipwreck occurred.

Paul lent a hand for the general good. He collected some sticks, which he put on the ?re. As he did so,
19

“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

415

a poisonous viper emerged and bit him, fastening onto
his hand. The Maltese people thought this was some
sort of divine punishment.1
20

The local people who saw that Paul had been bit-

ten thought that he would “swell up with in?ammation.” The original-language word found here is “a
medical term,” according to one reference work. It is
not surprising that such an expression might readily
come to the mind of “Luke the beloved physician.”
(Acts 28:6; Col. 4:14) At any rate, Paul shook o? the
venomous serpent and was unharmed.
21

The wealthy landowner Publius lived in the area.

He may have been the leading Roman o?cer on Malta. Luke described him as “the principal man of the island,” employing the exact title that has been found on
two Maltese inscriptions. He hospitably entertained
Paul and his companions for three days. However,
1 That the people knew of such snakes indicates that vipers existed on the island back then. In modern times, vipers are not found
on Malta. That di?erence might well be the result of changes in the
habitat over the centuries. Or the increase in human population on
the island may have eradicated vipers.

21. (a) What are some examples of exactness, or accuracy, that we ?nd
in this portion of Luke’s account? (b) What miracles did Paul perform,
and with what e?ect on the Maltese people?
416

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Publius’ father was ill. Again Luke described a condition with accuracy. He wrote that the man “was lying
down distressed with fever and dysentery,” citing the
precise medical nature of the illness. Paul prayed and
laid his hands on the man, and he was healed. Deeply
impressed by this miracle, the local people brought
other sick ones to be healed, and they brought gifts to
?ll the needs of Paul and his companions.—Acts 28:
7-10.
22

The portion of Paul’s voyage that we have consid-

ered so far resounds with accuracy and truth. One professor said: “Luke’s account . . . stands out as one of
the most vivid pieces of descriptive writing in the
whole Bible. Its details regarding ?rst-century seamanship are so precise and its portrayal of conditions on
the eastern Mediterranean so accurate” that it must
have been based on a written journal. Luke may well
have made such notes as he traveled with the apostle.
If so, the next leg of the trip gave him plenty to write
about as well. What would happen to Paul when they
?nally arrived in Rome? Let us see.
22. (a) How has one professor praised Luke’s account of the voyage to
Rome? (b) What will we consider in the next chapter?
“NOT A SOUL OF YOU WILL BE LOST”

417

CHAPTER 27



“Bearing Thorough Witness”
Imprisoned in Rome, Paul continues to preach
Based on Acts 28:11-31

A VESSEL bearing the ?gurehead “Sons of Zeus,”
likely a large grain carrier, is sailing from the Mediterranean island of Malta to Italy. The year is about
59 C.E. On board are the apostle Paul—a prisoner under escort—and fellow Christians Luke and Aristarchus. (Acts 27:2) Unlike the ship’s crew, these evangelizers seek no protection from the sons of the Greek
god Zeus—the twin brothers Castor and Pollux. (Acts
28:11, ftn.) Rather, Paul and his companions serve Jehovah, who made known that Paul would bear witness
to the truth in Rome and stand before Caesar.—Acts
23:11; 27:24.
2

Three days after docking at Syracuse, a beautiful

Sicilian city rivaling Athens and Rome, the ship sails
1. What con?dence do Paul and his companions have, and why?
2, 3. What route does Paul’s ship take, and what support has Paul enjoyed from the start?
418

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

to Rhegium on the toe of the Italian peninsula. Then,
aided by a south wind, the vessel makes the 175nautical-mile trip to the Italian port of Puteoli (near
modern-day Naples) in optimum time, arriving on the
second day.—Acts 28:12, 13.
3

Paul is now on the ?nal leg of his trip to Rome,

where he will appear before Emperor Nero. From
start to ?nish, “the God of all comfort” has been with
Paul. (2 Cor. 1:3) As we shall see, that support does
not diminish; nor does Paul lose his zeal as a missionary.

4

“Paul Thanked God and Took Courage”
(Acts 28:14, 15)
At Puteoli, Paul and his companions “found broth-

ers and were entreated to remain with them seven days.” (Acts 28:14) What a wonderful example
of Christian hospitality! No doubt those hospitable
brothers were repaid many times over by the spiritual encouragement they received from Paul and his
companions. Why, though, would a prisoner under
4, 5. (a) What hospitality did Paul and his companions receive at Puteoli, and why may he have been granted so much liberty? (b) Even when
in prison, how may Christians bene?t from their good conduct?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

419

watch be granted so much liberty? Possibly because
the apostle had won the full trust of his Roman
guards.
5

Likewise today, Jehovah’s servants, while in pris-

ons and concentration camps, have often been granted special freedoms and privileges because of their
Christian conduct. In Romania, for example, a man
serving 75 years for robbery began to study God’s
Word and underwent a remarkable change in personality. In response, the prison authorities assigned him
to go into town—unescorted—to purchase items for
the prison! Above all, of course, our good conduct glori?es Jehovah.—1 Pet. 2:12.
6

From Puteoli, Paul and his companions likely

walked some 30 miles to Capua on the Appian Way,
which led to Rome. Paved with large, ?at blocks of
lava, this famous road o?ered splendid views of the
Italian countryside and, at certain points along its
course, of the Mediterranean Sea. The road also took
travelers through the Pontine Marshes, a swampy area
some 40 miles from Rome and the location of the
6, 7. How did the Roman brothers show extraordinary love?
420

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

Marketplace of Appius. When the brothers in Rome
“heard the news about us,” wrote Luke, some came as
far as the Marketplace, while others waited at Three
Taverns, a rest stop about 30 miles from Rome. What
extraordinary love!—Acts 28:15.
7

The Marketplace of Appius provided little com-

fort for the traveler needing a respite from the rigors
of his journey. Roman poet and satirist Horace describes the Marketplace as “crowded with sailors and
surly inn-keepers.” He wrote that “the water was most
execrable,” or foul. And he even refused to dine there!
Despite all the discomforts, however, the delegation
from Rome happily waited for Paul and his companions in order to escort them safely along the ?nal leg
of their journey.
8

“Upon catching sight of” his brothers, the account

says, “Paul thanked God and took courage.” (Acts 28:
15) Yes, at the mere sight of these dear ones, some of
whom the apostle may have known personally, he felt
strengthened and comforted. Why did Paul thank
God? He knew that unsel?sh love is an aspect of the
8. Why did Paul thank God “upon catching sight of” his brothers?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

421

spirit’s fruitage. (Gal. 5:22) Today, too, holy spirit
moves Christians to put themselves out for one another and to comfort those in need.—1 Thess. 5:11, 14.
9

For example, holy spirit impels responsive ones to

extend hospitality to traveling overseers, visiting missionaries, and other full-time servants, many of whom
have made great sacri?ces in order to serve Jehovah
more fully. Ask yourself: ‘Can I do more to support
the visit of the circuit overseer, perhaps showing hospitality to him and his wife if he is married? Can I arrange to work along with them in the ministry?’ In return, you may receive a rich blessing. For example,
imagine the joy the Roman brothers felt as they listened to Paul and his companions relate some of their
many upbuilding experiences.—Acts 15:3, 4.
“Everywhere It Is Spoken Against” (Acts 28:16-22)
10 When the band of travelers ?nally entered into
Rome, “Paul was permitted to stay by himself with the
soldier guarding him.” (Acts 28:16) For those in light
9. How can we re?ect the spirit that was shown by the brothers who met
Paul?
10. What were Paul’s circumstances in Rome, and what did the apostle
do soon after his arrival?
422

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

custody, security against escape usually called for a
chain that bound the prisoner to his guard. Even so,
Paul was a Kingdom proclaimer, and a chain certainly could not silence him. Hence, after giving himself
just three days to recover from the journey, he called
together the principal men of the Jews in Rome in order to introduce himself and give a witness.
11

“Men, brothers,” said Paul, “although I had done

nothing contrary to the people or the customs of our
forefathers, I was delivered over as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. And these, after making an examination, were desirous of releasing
me, as there was no cause for death in me. But when
the Jews kept speaking against it, I was compelled to
appeal to Caesar, but not as though I had anything of
which to accuse my nation.”—Acts 28:17-19.
12

By addressing his Jewish listeners as “brothers,”

Paul tried to establish common ground with them and
break down any prejudice they may have had. (1 Cor.
9:20) Also, he made it clear that he was there, not to
11, 12. When speaking to his fellow Jews, how did Paul attempt to break
down any prejudice they may have had?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

423

point an accusing ?nger at his fellow Jews, but to appeal to Caesar. Paul’s appeal, however, was news to
the local Jewish community. (Acts 28:21) Why this apparent lapse in communication on the part of the
Jews in Judea? One reference work states: “Paul’s ship
must have been among the ?rst that arrived in Italy
after the winter, and representatives of the Jewish authorities in Jerusalem could not have arrived, nor
could a letter about the case.”
13

Paul now introduced the Kingdom theme by way

of a statement that was sure to arouse the curiosity of
his Jewish guests. He said: “Really on this account I
entreated to see and speak to you, for because of the
hope of Israel this chain I have around me.” (Acts 28:
20) That hope, of course, was bound up in the Messiah and his Kingdom, as proclaimed by the Christian
congregation. “We think it proper to hear from you
what your thoughts are,” replied the Jewish elders,
“for truly as regards this sect it is known to us that
everywhere it is spoken against.”—Acts 28:22.
13, 14. How did Paul introduce the Kingdom theme, and how can we imitate his example?
424

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

14

When we have the opportunity to share the

good news, we can imitate Paul by using thoughtprovoking statements or questions to arouse the interest of our listeners. Excellent suggestions can be
found in such publications as Reasoning From the
Scriptures and Bene?t From Theocratic Ministry School
Education. Are you making good use of these Bible
study aids?

15

“B earing Thorough Witness”—A Model for Us
(Acts 28:23-29)
On the chosen day, the local Jews “came in

greater numbers” to Paul’s lodging place. Paul explained matters to them “by bearing thorough witness concerning the kingdom of God and by using
persuasion with them concerning Jesus from both
the law of Moses and the Prophets, from morning
till evening.” (Acts 28:23) Four things stand out in
regard to Paul’s witness. First, he focused on God’s
Kingdom. Second, he tried to appeal to his listeners
“by using persuasion.” Third, he reasoned from the
Scriptures. Fourth, he showed a sel?ess attitude,
15. What four things stand out concerning Paul’s witness?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

425

witnessing “from morning till evening.” What a ?ne
example for us! The result? “Some began to believe,” while others would not. Dissension ensued,
and the people “began to depart,” reports Luke.
—Acts 28:24, 25a.
16

This response was no surprise to Paul, for it har-

monized with Bible prophecy and followed a pattern
with which he was familiar. (Acts 13:42-47; 18:5, 6; 19:
8, 9) Hence, to his unreceptive departing guests, Paul
said: “The holy spirit aptly spoke through Isaiah the
prophet to your forefathers, saying, ‘Go to this people
and say: “By hearing, you will hear but by no means
understand; and, looking, you will look but by no
means see. For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive.” ’ ” (Acts 28:25b-27) The original-language
term rendered “unreceptive” indicates a heart that
was “thickened,” or “fattened,” thus preventing the
Kingdom message from penetrating it. (Acts 28:27,
ftn.) What a tragic situation!
17

Unlike his Jewish listeners, “the nations . . . will

16-18. Why was the negative response of the Roman Jews no surprise
to Paul, and how should we feel when our message is rejected?
426

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

certainly listen,” said Paul in closing. (Acts 28:28;
Ps. 67:2; Isa. 11:10) Indeed, the apostle could speak
with authority on that subject, for he had personally
seen many Gentiles respond to the Kingdom message!
—Acts 13:48; 14:27.
18

Like Paul, let us not take it personally when peo-

ple reject the good news. After all, we know that comparatively few will ?nd the road to life. (Matt. 7:13,
14) Moreover, when rightly disposed ones do take a
stand for true worship, let us rejoice and welcome
them with an open heart.—Luke 15:7.
“Preaching the Kingdom of God” (Acts 28:30, 31)
19 Luke concludes his narrative on a truly positive
and warm note, saying: “[Paul] remained for an entire
two years in his own hired house, and he would kindly receive all those who came in to him, preaching the
kingdom of God to them and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest freeness of speech, without hindrance.” (Acts 28:30, 31)
What an outstanding example of hospitality, faith,
and zeal!
19. How did Paul make the most of his circumstances?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

427

20

One of those whom Paul kindly received was a

man named Onesimus, a runaway slave from Colossae. Paul helped Onesimus to become a Christian, and
Onesimus, in turn, became a “faithful and beloved
brother” to Paul. In fact, Paul described him as “my
child, to whom I became a father.” (Col. 4:9; Philem.
10-12) How Onesimus must have lifted Paul’s spirits!1
21

Others too bene?ted from Paul’s ?ne example. To

the Philippians, he wrote: “My a?airs have turned out
for the advancement of the good news rather than
otherwise, so that my bonds have become public
knowledge in association with Christ among all the
Praetorian Guard and all the rest; and most of the
brothers in the Lord, feeling con?dence by reason of
my prison bonds, are showing all the more courage to
speak the word of God fearlessly.”—Phil. 1:12-14.
22

Paul took advantage of his con?nement in Rome

1 Paul wanted to keep Onesimus there with him, but this would
have violated Roman law and infringed on the rights of Onesimus’
master, the Christian Philemon. Hence, Onesimus returned to Philemon, taking along a letter from Paul that encouraged Philemon to
receive his slave kindly, as a spiritual brother.—Philem. 13-19.

20, 21. Mention some examples of those who bene?ted from Paul’s ministry in Rome.
22. How did Paul take advantage of his con?nement in Rome?
428

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

to write important letters that are now part of the
Christian Greek Scriptures.1 Interestingly, in his letter to the Ephesians, Paul used Roman armor to illustrate a Christian’s spiritual armor. (Eph. 6:11-17) Perhaps the idea came to him while he was looking at his
soldier guard. (Acts 28:16) What is the lesson for us?
If we are observant, we can often ?nd good illustrations in our surroundings.
23

By the time of his release, which is not mentioned

in Acts, Paul had been in custody for some four years
—two in Caesarea and two in Rome.2 (Acts 23:35; 24:
27) But he maintained a positive outlook, doing all
that he could in God’s service. Likewise, many of Jehovah’s servants today, though unjustly imprisoned
because of their faith, have retained their joy and kept
preaching. Consider the example of Adolfo, who was
imprisoned in Spain because of his Christian neutrality. “We are amazed at you,” said one o?cer. “We have
1 See the box “The Five Letters of Paul’s First Roman Captivity,”
on page 430.
2 See the box “Paul’s Life After 61 C.E.,” on page 432.

23, 24. Like Paul, how have many modern-day Christians demonstrated
a positive attitude despite being unjustly con?ned?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

429

THE FIVE LETTERS OF PAUL’S
FIRST ROMAN CAPTIVITY

Five of the apostle Paul’s letters were written
about 60-61 C.E., during his ?rst captivity in Rome.
In the letter to Philemon, a fellow believer, Paul explains that Philemon’s runaway slave Onesimus had
become a Christian. Paul was Onesimus’ spiritual
father and was sending the “formerly useless” slave
back to his owner as a Christian brother.—Philem.
10-12, 16.
In his letter to the Colossians, Paul indicates that
Onesimus was “from among” them. (Col. 4:9) Onesimus and fellow Christian Tychicus had the privilege
of delivering both of the aforementioned letters as
well as the one that Paul wrote to the Ephesians.
—Eph. 6:21.
When writing to the Philippians, Paul mentions his
“prison bonds” and again speaks of the situation of
the letter carrier—this time, Epaphroditus. The Philippians had sent Epaphroditus to assist Paul. But
Epaphroditus had become ill almost to the point of
death. He had also become depressed because the
Philippians “heard he had fallen sick.” Hence, Paul
told them to treasure “men of that sort.”—Phil. 1:7;
2:25-30.
430

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

The letter to the Hebrews was addressed to the Hebrew Christians in Judea. Although the letter does
not speci?cally identify the writer, evidence suggests that it was Paul. The writing is in his style.
Paul sends greetings from Italy, and he mentions
Timothy, who was with him in Rome.—Phil. 1:1;
Col. 1:1; Philem. 1; Heb. 13:23, 24.

been making life impossible for you, and the worse we
made it, the more you smiled and had a kind word.”
24

In time, Adolfo was trusted to the point that his

cell door was left open. Soldiers would visit to ask
about the Bible. One of the guards would even go into
Adolfo’s cell to read the Bible, while Adolfo would
keep a lookout. So the prisoner “guarded” the sentry!
May the ?ne example of such faithful Witnesses move
us to show “all the more courage to speak the word
of God fearlessly,” even under di?cult circumstances.
25

An apostle of Christ under house arrest “preach-

ing the kingdom of God” to all who visited him—what
a heartwarming conclusion to the dynamic book of
25, 26. In a little less than 30 years, what amazing prophecy had Paul
seen ful?lled, and how does this compare with our time?
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

431

PAUL’S LIFE AFTER 61 C.E.



Likely in about 61 C.E., Paul appeared before Emperor Nero, who apparently pronounced him innocent. We do not know much about the apostle’s activities thereafter. If he made his planned trip to
Spain, it would have been during this time. (Rom.
15:28) Paul traveled “to the extreme limit of the
W[est],” wrote Clement of Rome in about 95 C.E.
From Paul’s three letters dated to the period after his release—1 and 2 Timothy and Titus—we
learn that Paul visited Crete, Macedonia, Nicopolis,
and Troas. (1 Tim. 1:3; 2 Tim. 4:13; Titus 1:5; 3:12)
Perhaps it was in Nicopolis, Greece, that he was
again arrested. Whatever the case, in approximately 65 C.E., he was back in prison in Rome. This time,
however, Nero would show no mercy. Indeed, when
a ?re devastated the city in 64 C.E., Nero—according to Roman historian Tacitus—had falsely blamed
the Christians and initiated a brutal campaign of
persecution.
In his second letter to Timothy, Paul, expecting imminent death, asked him and Mark to come
quickly. Noteworthy is the courage of Luke and Onesiphorus, who risked their lives to comfort Paul.
(2 Tim. 1:16, 17; 4:6-9, 11) Indeed, to profess Chris432

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

tianity publicly was to risk arrest and death by torture. Paul likely su?ered martyrdom soon after writing his ?nal letter to Timothy in about 65 C.E.
Nero himself reportedly came to a violent end about
three years after Paul’s martyrdom.

Acts! In the ?rst chapter, we read the commission that
Jesus gave his followers when he said: “You will receive power when the holy spirit arrives upon you,
and you will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and
in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant part
of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) Now, less than 30 years later,
the Kingdom message had been “preached in all creation that is under heaven.”1 (Col. 1:23) What a testimony to the power of God’s spirit!—Zech. 4:6.
26

Today, that same spirit has empowered the re-

maining ones of Christ’s brothers, along with their
companions of the “other sheep,” to continue “bearing thorough witness concerning the kingdom of
God” in more than 230 lands! (John 10:16; Acts 28:23)
Are you having a full share in that work?
1 See “The Good News ‘Preached in All Creation,’ ” on page 434.
“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS”

433

THE G O OD NEWS
“PREACHED IN ALL CREATION”

In about 61 C.E., while the apostle Paul was a prisoner in Rome, he wrote that the “good news” had
been “preached in all creation that is under heaven.”
(Col. 1:23) How should we understand that statement?
It appears that Paul was describing in broad terms
how far the “good news” had reached. For example,
Alexander the Great had penetrated Asia to the borders of India in the fourth century B.C.E. Julius Caesar had invaded Britain in 55 B.C.E., and Claudius
had subjugated the southern part of that island, making it part of the Roman Empire in 43 C.E. The Far
East was also known, for it was a source of ?ne silk.
Had the good news been preached in Britain, China, and the Far East? That seems unlikely. Indeed,
when Paul wrote to the Colossians, he still had not realized his own goal, stated in about 56 C.E., of preaching in the then “untouched territory” of Spain. (Rom.
15:20, 23, 24) Still, by about 61 C.E., the Kingdom
message was widely known. At the very least, it had
spread as far as to the homelands of the Jews and
proselytes who were baptized at Pentecost 33 C.E. as
well as to the lands visited by Jesus’ apostles.—Acts
2:1, 8-11, 41, 42.
434

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

CHAPTER 28



“To the Most Distant
Part of the Earth”
Jehovah’s Witnesses
continue a work that had its start
with the followers of Jesus Christ in the
?rst century of our Common Era

THEY zealously bore witness. Their hearts impelled them to accept the help and guidance of the
holy spirit. Persecution did not still their lips. And
the rich blessing of God was upon them. All of this
was true of the early Christians, just as it is true
of Jehovah’s Witnesses today.
2

Surely you have been encouraged by the faith-

strengthening accounts found in the action-packed
Bible book Acts of Apostles! It is unique, for it is
the only divinely inspired history of early Christianity.
3

The book of Acts names 95 individuals from

1. What parallels are there between the early Christians and Jehovah’s
Witnesses today?
2, 3. What is especially noteworthy about the book of Acts?
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

435

32 lands, 54 cities, and 9 islands. It is a thrilling
story about people—common folk, haughty religionists, vain politicians, rabid persecutors. But
most of all, it is about your ?rst-century brothers
and sisters, who not only met the usual challenges
of life but also preached the good news with zeal.
4

Almost 2,000 years now separate us from the

activities of the zealous apostles Peter and Paul,
the beloved physician Luke, generous Barnabas,
courageous Stephen, kindhearted Dorcas, hospitable Lydia, and so many other faithful witnesses.
Yet, we enjoy a special bond with them. Why? Because we have the same disciple-making commission. (Matt. 28:19, 20) How blessed we are to share
in it!
5

Re?ect on the commission Jesus gave his fol-

lowers. “You will receive power when the holy spirit arrives upon you,” he said, “and you will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea
4. Why do we enjoy a special bond with such individuals as the apostle
Paul, Dorcas, and other faithful witnesses of old?
5. Where did Jesus’ early followers begin to carry out their commission?
436

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

and Samaria and to the most distant part of the
earth.” (Acts 1:8) First, the holy spirit empowered
the disciples to be witnesses “in Jerusalem.” (Acts
1:1–8:3) Next, under the spirit’s direction, they witnessed “in all Judea and Samaria.” (Acts 8:4–13:3)
Then they began to take the good news “to the most
distant part of the earth.”—Acts 13:4–28:31.
6

Your fellow believers of the ?rst century did not

have the entire Bible for use in their work of
bearing witness. Matthew’s Gospel was not available until at least 41 C.E. Some of Paul’s letters
were written before Acts was completed, in about
61 C.E. But the early Christians had neither personal copies of the complete Holy Scriptures nor
a variety of publications to leave with interested
people. Before becoming Jesus’ disciples, Jewish
Christians had heard the Hebrew Scriptures read
in the synagogue. (2 Cor. 3:14-16) But even they
needed to be diligent students, since they probably
had to quote texts from memory.
6, 7. In performing our ministry, what advantage do we have over our
?rst-century fellow believers?
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

437

7

Today, most of us have a personal copy of the

Bible and an abundance of Bible literature. We are
making disciples by declaring the good news in
more than 230 lands and in many languages.
Empowered by Holy Spirit
8

When Jesus commissioned his disciples to be

witnesses, he told them: “You will receive power
when the holy spirit arrives upon you.” Under the
direction of God’s spirit, or active force, Jesus’ followers would ultimately serve as witnesses in all
the earth. By holy spirit, Peter and Paul e?ected
cures, expelled demons, even raised the dead! However, the power received through holy spirit had a
more important purpose. It enabled the apostles
and other disciples to impart accurate knowledge
that means everlasting life.—John 17:3.
9

On the day of Pentecost 33 C.E., Jesus’ disciples

spoke “with di?erent tongues, just as the spirit was
granting them to make utterance.” They thus bore
8, 9. (a) The holy spirit enabled Jesus’ disciples to do what? (b) What
is the faithful slave producing with the help of God’s spirit?
438

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

witness regarding “the magni?cent things of God.”
(Acts 2:1-4, 11) We do not miraculously speak in
tongues today. With the help of God’s spirit, however, the faithful slave is producing Bible literature
in many languages. For example, millions of copies of The Watchtower and Awake! are printed every
month. All of this enables us to declare “the magni?cent things of God” to people of all nations,
tribes, and tongues.—Rev. 7:9.
10

Since 1989 the faithful slave has placed empha-

sis on making the New World Translation of the Holy
Scriptures available in many languages. This Bible
has already been translated into scores of tongues,
and tens of millions of copies have been printed
—with many more to come. Only God and his spirit could have made these e?orts successful.
11

Publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses have been

translated into more than 470 languages. Translation work is being done by hundreds of Christian
10. Since 1989, what has been done with regard to Bible translation?
11. What has been done with respect to the translation of Witness publications?
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

439

volunteers in over 130 countries. This should not
surprise us, for no other organization on earth is
led by holy spirit in “bearing thorough witness”
worldwide regarding Jehovah God, his Messianic King, and the established heavenly Kingdom!
—Acts 28:23.
12

When Paul bore witness to Jews and Gentiles

at Antioch in Pisidia, “those who were rightly disposed for everlasting life became believers.” (Acts
13:48) As Luke concludes the book of Acts, Paul
is “preaching the kingdom of God . . . with the
greatest freeness of speech, without hindrance.”
(Acts 28:31) Where is the apostle witnessing? Why,
in Rome—the capital of a world power! Whether
through discourses or by other means, Jesus’ early
followers did all their witnessing work with the
help and guidance of holy spirit.
13

Persevering Despite Persecution
When Jesus’ early disciples experienced perse-

12. How were Paul and other Christians able to do the work of bearing
witness?
13. Why should we pray when we experience persecution?
440

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

cution, they petitioned Jehovah for boldness. The
result? They were ?lled with holy spirit and empowered to speak God’s word with boldness. (Acts
4:18-31) We too pray for wisdom and strength to
keep on witnessing despite persecution. (Jas. 1:2-8)
Because we are blessed by God and helped by his
spirit, we press on in Kingdom service. Nothing
stops the work of bearing witness—neither intense
opposition nor brutal persecution. When we are
being persecuted, we certainly need to pray for
holy spirit and for wisdom and courage to declare
the good news.—Luke 11:13.
14

Stephen gave a bold witness before he met his

death at enemy hands. (Acts 6:5; 7:54-60) In the
“great persecution” that arose at that time, all
the disciples except the apostles were scattered
throughout Judea and Samaria. But that did not
stop the work of bearing witness. Philip went to
Samaria “to preach the Christ” and did so with
14, 15. (a) What happened as a result of “the tribulation that arose over
Stephen”? (b) In our time, how did many people in Siberia come to learn
the truth?
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

441

excellent results. (Acts 8:1-8, 14, 15, 25) Moreover,
we are told: “Those who had been scattered by the
tribulation that arose over Stephen went through
as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, but
speaking the word to no one except to Jews only.
However, out of them there were some men of Cyprus and Cyrene that came to Antioch and began
talking to the Greek-speaking people, declaring the
good news of the Lord Jesus.” (Acts 11:19, 20) At
that time, persecution spread the Kingdom message.
15

In our time, something similar occurred in the

former Soviet Union. Especially in the 1950’s, thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses were exiled to Siberia. Because they were scattered in various settlements, the good news was constantly spreading in
that vast land. In no way could so many Witnesses have found the money needed to travel perhaps
as much as 6,000 miles to proclaim the good news!
However, the government itself sent them across
the country. “As it turned out,” said one brother,
442

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

“the authorities themselves enabled thousands of
sincere people in Siberia to come to know the
truth.”
Richly Blessed by Jehovah
16

Jehovah’s blessing was unquestionably upon

the early Christians. Paul and others planted and
watered, “but God kept making it grow.” (1 Cor.
3:5, 6) Reports in the book of Acts provide evidence of such growth because of Jehovah’s blessing on the work of bearing witness. For instance,
“the word of God went on growing, and the number of the disciples kept multiplying in Jerusalem very much.” (Acts 6:7) As the witness work
spread, “the congregation throughout the whole of
Judea and Galilee and Samaria entered into a period of peace, being built up; and as it walked in
the [reverential] fear of Jehovah and in the comfort of the holy spirit it kept on multiplying.”
—Acts 9:31.
16, 17. The book of Acts gives us what evidence of Jehovah’s blessing
on the work of bearing witness?
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

443

17

In Syrian Antioch, both Jews and Greek-speak-

ing people heard the truth from courageous witnesses. “Furthermore,” says the account, “the hand of
Jehovah was with them, and a great number that became believers turned to the Lord.” (Acts 11:21) Regarding further progress in that city, we read: “The
word of Jehovah went on growing and spreading.”
(Acts 12:24) And with the witnessing work of Paul
and others in full swing among Gentiles, “in a mighty
way the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.”—Acts 19:20.
18

“The hand of Jehovah” is unquestionably with

us today too. That is why so many are becoming
believers and are symbolizing their dedication to
God by being baptized. Moreover, it is only with
God’s help and blessing that we are able to endure sti? opposition—at times, intense persecution—and successfully carry out our ministry, even
as Paul and other early Christians did. (Acts 14:1918, 19. (a) Why do we know that “the hand of Jehovah” is with us?
(b) Give an example showing that Jehovah supports his people.
444

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

21) Jehovah God is always there for us. His “indefinitely lasting arms” unfailingly support us in all
our trials. (Deut. 33:27) Let us also remember that
for the sake of his great name, Jehovah never deserts his people.—1 Sam. 12:22; Ps. 94:14.
19

To illustrate: Because Brother Harald Abt kept

on bearing witness, the Nazis sent him to Sachsenhausen concentration camp during World War II.
In May 1942 the Gestapo went to the home of his
wife, Elsa, took away their little girl, and arrested
Elsa. She was sent to various camps. “My years in
German concentration camps taught me an outstanding lesson,” said Sister Abt. “It is, how greatly Jehovah’s spirit can strengthen you when you
are under extreme trial! Before I was arrested, I
had read a sister’s letter that said that under severe
trial Jehovah’s spirit causes a calmness to come
over you. I thought that she must have been exaggerating a bit. But when I went through trials myself, I knew that what she had said was true. It
really happens that way. It’s hard to imagine it, if
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

445

you have not experienced it. Yet it really happened
to me.”
20

Keep On B earing Thorough Witness!
The book of Acts ends with Paul zealously

“preaching the kingdom of God.” (Acts 28:31) Because he was under house arrest, he was not free
to witness from house to house in Rome. Nevertheless, he kept on witnessing to all who came to him.
Today, some of our dear brothers and sisters are
housebound, perhaps bedfast, or are living in nursing homes because of advanced age, illness, or in?rmity. Yet, their love for God and their desire to
bear witness are as strong as ever. We pray for
them and can well ask that our heavenly Father
bring them in touch with those yearning to learn
about him and his wonderful purposes.
21

Most of us can engage in the house-to-house

ministry and other features of the disciple-making
work. So let each of us do everything possible to
20. What did Paul do while under house arrest, and of what encouragement can this be to some of our brothers and sisters?
21. Why should we bear witness with a sense of urgency?
446

“BEARING THOROUGH WITNESS” ABOUT GOD’S KINGDOM

ful?ll our role as Kingdom proclaimers, sharing in
bearing witness “to the most distant part of the
earth.” This work must be done with a sense of urgency, for “the sign” of Christ’s presence is clearly
in evidence. (Matt. 24:3-14) There is no time to
lose. Right now, we have “plenty to do in the work
of the Lord.”—1 Cor. 15:58.
22

As we await “the coming of the great and fear-

inspiring day of Jehovah,” let us be determined to
continue giving a bold and faithful witness. (Joel 2:
31) We will yet ?nd many people like the Beroeans
who “received the word with the greatest eagerness
of mind.” (Acts 17:10, 11) May we therefore bear
witness until, in e?ect, we hear the words: “Well
done, good and faithful slave!” (Matt. 25:23) If we
zealously do our part in the disciple-making work
today and are ever faithful to Jehovah, we will
surely rejoice throughout eternity that we had a
blessed share in “bearing thorough witness” about
God’s Kingdom!
22. What should we be determined to do as we await Jehovah’s day?
“TO THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH”

447

Would you welcome more information?

You may contact Jehovah’s Witnesses at www.jw.org.

