“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”—LARGE PRINT

Do you ever feel lost and in nee d
of dire ction? Jesus Christ is the
Go d-given Leader whom every
human nee ds. He said: “I am the
fine shepherd, and I know my
sheep and my sheep know me.”
(John 10:14) Do you truly know
the Fine Shepherd—his qualities,
his me s s age and work, his ze al,
his love? This book will help you to
know Jesus more intimately and to
follow him more closely.

“COME BE MY

FOLLOWER”
Large-Print Edition

cflp-E

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”—LARGE PRINT

Do you ever feel lost and in nee d
of dire ction? Jesus Christ is the
Go d-given Leader whom every
human nee ds. He said: “I am the
fine shepherd, and I know my
sheep and my sheep know me.”
(John 10:14) Do you truly know
the Fine Shepherd—his qualities,
his me s s age and work, his ze al,
his love? This book will help you to
know Jesus more intimately and to
follow him more closely.

“COME BE MY

FOLLOWER”
Large-Print Edition

cflp-E

“COME BE MY
F OLLOWER”
Large-Print Edition
THIS BOOK IS THE PROPERTY OF

5 2007
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
All Rights Reserved
Publishers
WATCHTOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, INC.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
November 2012 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations
are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures
—With References.
“Come Be My Follower”—Large Print
English (cf lp-E)
Made in the United States of America

Dear Reader:
“Come be my follower.” (Mark 10:21) With those words,
Jesus Christ, in e?ect, beckons us to follow him. Are you
responding to his call? Doing so will have a profound in?uence on your life. Why?
Jehovah sent his only-begotten Son to the earth to give
his life as a ransom. (John 3:16) In addition to dying
for us, that Son showed us how to live. With each step
he took, he kept his integrity and brought joy to his
Father’s heart. Jesus also showed us how to be like his
Father. The ways and the will of the Father found perfect expression in the words and deeds of the Son.
—John 14:9.
Jesus is “a model,” the Bible says, “for [us] to follow his
steps closely.” (1 Peter 2:21) If we want to draw closer to
Jehovah, if we want to have a truly meaningful life now,
and if we want to remain on the road to everlasting life,
we must follow closely in the footsteps of Christ.
To begin this journey, we need to become familiar with
Jesus’ life on earth. So the portrait of Jesus preserved in
the Bible merits our careful study. Re?ecting on the
things Jesus said and did and considering how we can
imitate him in word and deed will help us to see more
clearly how to follow him.
May this publication help you to grow in your love
for Jesus and for Jehovah. And may that love move you to
follow closely in Jesus’ footsteps so that you may bring
joy to Jehovah’s heart now and forever.
The Publishers

Contents

Chapter

Page

1 “Be My Follower”—What Did
Jesus Mean?

5

2 “The Way and the Truth and the Life” 18
SECTION 1

“Come and See” the Christ

3 “I Am . . . Lowly in Heart”

33

4 “Look! The Lion That Is of
the Tribe of Judah”

47

5 “All the Treasures of Wisdom”

61

6 “He Learned Obedience”

74

7 “Consider Closely the One Who
Has Endured”

88

SECTION 2

“Teaching . . . and Preaching the
Good News”

8 “For This I Was Sent Forth”

103

9 “Go . . . and Make Disciples”

116

10 “It Is Written”

130

Chapter

Page

11 “Never Has Another Man Spoken
Like This”

144

12 “Without an Illustration He Would
Not Speak to Them”

158

SECTION 3

“The Love the Christ Has Compels Us”

13 “I Love the Father”

173

14 “Great Crowds Approached Him”

187

15 “Moved With Pity”

201

16 “Jesus . . . Loved Them to the End”

215

17 “No One Has Love Greater
Than This”

229

18 “Continue Following Me”

242

CHAPTER

1

“Be My Follower”
—What Did Jesus Mean?
WHAT is the best invitation you have ever received?
You might think of a time when you were invited to
attend a special occasion, perhaps the wedding of
two people very dear to you. Or you might recall the
day you were invited to take on an important job. If
such invitations have come your way, you were no
doubt thrilled, even honored, to get them. The truth
is, though, that you have received a far better invitation. Each one of us has. And the way we choose
to respond to that invitation a?ects us profoundly.
It is the most important choice we will make in life.
2 What is that invitation? It comes from Jesus
Christ, the only-begotten Son of Almighty God, Jehovah, and it is recorded in the Bible. At Mark 10:
21, we read Jesus’ words: “Come be my follower.”
That is, in e?ect, Jesus’ invitation to each one of us.
We do well to ask ourselves, ‘How will I respond?’
The answer might appear to be obvious. Who would
1, 2. What is the best invitation a human could receive, and what question might we ask ourselves?
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

5

refuse such a splendid invitation? Surprisingly, most
people do refuse. Why?
Consider as an example a man who received that
invitation in person some 2,000 years ago. He was a
highly respected man. He had at least three things
that humans tend to consider desirable, even enviable—youth, wealth, and power. The Bible record
describes him as a “young man,” as “very rich,” and
as a “ruler.” (Matthew 19:20; Luke 18:18, 23) However, there was something more important about
this young man. He had heard of the Great Teacher,
Jesus, and he liked what he had heard.
3

Most rulers in those days failed to give Jesus the
respect he deserved. (John 7:48; 12:42) But this ruler acted di?erently. The Bible tells us: “As [Jesus]
was going out on his way, a certain man ran up and
fell upon his knees before him and put the question
to him: ‘Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit
everlasting life?’ ” (Mark 10:17) Notice how eager
this man was to speak with Jesus, running up to him
out in the open, just as any of the poor and lowly
4

3, 4. (a) What might be considered enviable about the man who approached Jesus to inquire about everlasting life? (b) What good qualities
might Jesus have seen in the wealthy young ruler?
6

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

people might have done. Further, he knelt respectfully before Christ. So he had a measure of humility and an awareness of his spiritual need. Jesus valued such good qualities. (Matthew 5:3; 18:4) Little
wonder, then, that “Jesus looked upon him and felt
love for him.” (Mark 10:21) How did Jesus answer
the young man’s question?
5

The Invitation of a Lifetime
Jesus showed that his Father had already sup-

plied information on the vital question about gaining everlasting life. He pointed to the Scriptures, and
the young man a?rmed that he was faithfully obeying the Mosaic Law. Jesus, however, with his extraordinary insight, saw what was below the surface.
(John 2:25) He perceived a spiritual problem in this
ruler—a serious one. Hence, Jesus said: “One thing
is missing about you.” What was that “one thing”?
Jesus said: “Go, sell what things you have and give
to the poor.” (Mark 10:21) Did Jesus mean that a
person must be penniless in order to serve God?
5. How did Jesus respond to the wealthy young man, and how do we
know that poverty was not the “one thing” missing about him? (See also
footnote.)
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

7

No.1 Christ was revealing something of great importance.
6 To lay bare what was missing, Jesus o?ered the
man a wonderful opportunity: “Come be my follower.” Just imagine—the Son of the Most High God invited that man, face-to-face, to follow him! Jesus also
promised him a reward beyond imagination. He said:
“You will have treasure in heaven.” Did the wealthy
young ruler seize this opportunity, this glorious invitation? The account reads: “He grew sad at the saying and went o? grieved, for he was holding many
possessions.” (Mark 10:21, 22) So Jesus’ unexpected
words revealed a problem in the heart of this man.
He was too deeply attached to his possessions and,
no doubt, to the power and prestige that came with
them. Sadly, his love for such things far outweighed
any love he had for Christ. The “one thing” missing,
then, was wholehearted, self-sacri?cing love for Je1 Jesus did not ask everyone who followed him to give up all possessions. And although he did comment on how di?cult it is for a
rich person to enter the Kingdom of God, he added: “All things are
possible with God.” (Mark 10:23, 27) In fact, a few wealthy people
did become Christ’s followers. They received speci?c counsel in the
Christian congregation, but they were not asked to donate all their
wealth to the poor.—1 Timothy 6:17.

6. What invitation did Jesus o?er, and what did the wealthy young ruler’s response reveal about his heart?
8

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

sus and Jehovah. Because the young man lacked such
love, he turned down the invitation of a lifetime!
How, though, are you involved?
7 Jesus’ invitation was not limited to that man;
nor was it restricted to just a few people. Jesus said:
“If anyone wants to come after me, let him . . . follow me continually.” (Luke 9:23) Notice that “anyone” can be Christ’s follower if he truly “wants
to.” God draws such honesthearted ones to his Son.
(John 6:44) Not just the rich, not just the poor, not
just those of a certain race or nation, and not just
those living during that time period but all are given an opportunity to accept Jesus’ invitation. So Jesus’ words “Come be my follower” really do apply to
you. Why should you want to follow Christ? And just
what is involved?
Why B e a Follower of Christ?
8 There is a truth that we should acknowledge:
We have a profound need for good leadership. Not
all humans admit to having that need, but it is
there nonetheless. Jehovah’s prophet Jeremiah was
inspired to record this eternal truth: “I well know,
7. Why may we be sure that Jesus’ invitation includes us today?
8. What need do all humans have, and why?
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

9

O Jehovah, that to earthling man his way does not
belong. It does not belong to man who is walking
even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) Humans
have neither the ability nor the right to govern themselves. Indeed, human history is largely a record of
bad leadership. (Ecclesiastes 8:9) In Jesus’ day, the
leaders oppressed, abused, and misled the people.
Jesus astutely observed that the common people
were “as sheep without a shepherd.” (Mark 6:34)
The same is true of mankind today. As a group and
as individuals, we need leadership we can trust and
respect. Does Jesus meet that need? Consider several reasons why the answer is yes.
First, Jesus was chosen by Jehovah God. Most human leaders are chosen by their fellow imperfect humans, who are often deceived and who tend to misjudge. Jesus is a di?erent kind of leader. His very
title tells us that. The word “Christ,” like the word
“Messiah,” means “Anointed One.” Yes, Jesus was
anointed, or specially appointed to his sacred o?ce,
by none other than the Sovereign Lord of the universe. Jehovah God said of his Son: “Look! My ser9

9. What sets Jesus apart from all other leaders?
10

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

vant whom I chose, my beloved, whom my soul approved! I will put my spirit upon him.” (Matthew 12:
18) No one knows better than our Creator what kind
of leader we need. Jehovah’s wisdom is in?nite, so
we have ample reason to trust his selection.—Proverbs 3:5, 6.
10 Second, Jesus set a perfect and an inspiring example for us. The best kind of leader has qualities
that his subjects can admire and imitate. He leads
by example, inspiring others to become better than
they were. What qualities would you respect the
most in a leader? Courage? Wisdom? Compassion?
What about perseverance in the face of hardship? As
you study the record of Jesus’ life course on earth,
you will ?nd that he possessed those qualities—and
more. The perfect re?ection of his heavenly Father,
Jesus possessed every divine quality in full measure.
He was all that a perfect human could be. So in
everything that he did, in every word that he uttered,
in every inner feeling that he revealed, we ?nd something worth imitating. The Bible says that he provided “a model for you to follow his steps closely.”
—1 Peter 2:21.
10. Why is Jesus’ example the best one for humans to follow?
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

11

Third, Christ fully lived up to his claim: “I am the
?ne shepherd.” (John 10:14) To people in Bible times,
that ?gure of speech struck a familiar chord. Shepherds worked hard to take care of the sheep in
their charge. A “?ne shepherd” would put the safety and well-being of the ?ock ahead of his own. Jesus’ ancestor David, for example, was a shepherd as
a youth, and on more than one occasion, he risked
his life to ?ght o? an attack on his sheep by a vicious
wild animal. (1 Samuel 17:34-36) Jesus went even
further in behalf of his human followers. He laid
down his life for them. (John 10:15) How many leaders have such a self-sacri?cing spirit?
12 Jesus was “the ?ne shepherd” in another sense.
He said: “I know my sheep and my sheep know me.”
(John 10:14) Think of the word picture that Jesus
was painting. To a casual observer, a ?ock of sheep
might seem just a mass of woolly creatures. The
shepherd, however, knows each sheep individually.
He knows which ewes will soon need his aid when
they give birth, which lambs still need to be carried
11

11. How did Jesus prove to be “the ?ne shepherd”?
12, 13. (a) In what sense does a shepherd know his sheep, and in what
way do they know him? (b) Why do you want to be under the leadership
of the Fine Shepherd?
12

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

because they are too tiny and weak to walk far on
their own, and which sheep have recently been ill or
injured. The sheep know their shepherd as well.
They recognize his voice, never mistaking it for that
of any other shepherd. When there is a tone of alarm
or urgency in his call, they respond quickly. Where
he leads, they follow. And he knows just where to
lead them. He knows where the grass is lush and
green, where the streams are fresh and clear, where
the pastures are safe. As he watches over them, the
sheep sense that they are secure.—Psalm 23.
13 Do you not long for leadership like that? The
Fine Shepherd has an incomparable record in treating his followers just that way. He promises to guide
you to a happy and ful?lling life now and on into an
eternal future! (John 10:10, 11; Revelation 7:16, 17)
We need to know, then, just what is involved in following Christ.
What It Means to B e a Follower of Christ
14 Hundreds of millions of people today likely feel
that they have accepted Christ’s invitation. After all,
they choose to call themselves Christians. Perhaps
14, 15. In order to be a follower of Christ, why is it not enough to claim
to be a Christian or to form an emotional attachment to Jesus?
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

13

they belong to the church in which their parents had
them christened. Or they may claim to have an emotional attachment to Jesus and accept him as their
personal Savior. But does that make them followers
of Christ? Is that what Jesus had in mind when he
invited us to become his followers? There is much
more to it.
15 Consider the world of Christendom—those nations whose citizens for the most part claim to be
followers of Christ. Does Christendom re?ect the
teachings of Jesus Christ? Or do we see in those
lands hatred, oppression, crime, and injustice much
like that found throughout the rest of the world?
The respected Hindu leader Mohandas Gandhi once
said: “I know of no one who has done more for humanity than Jesus. In fact, there is nothing wrong
with Christianity.” He added: “The trouble is with
you Christians. You do not begin to live up to your
own teachings.”
16 Jesus said that his true followers would be
known not just for their words or for the label they
apply to themselves but primarily for their actions.
16, 17. What is often missing among professed Christians, and what
distinguishes genuine followers of Christ?
14

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

For example, he said: “Not everyone saying to me,
‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of my Father who is
in the heavens will.” (Matthew 7:21) Why do so
many who claim Jesus as their Lord fail to do his
Father’s will? Remember the wealthy young ruler.
All too often, “one thing is missing” among professed Christians—whole-souled love for Jesus and
for the One who sent him forth.
17 How can that be? Do not millions who call
themselves Christians also claim to love Christ? No
doubt. But love for Jesus and for Jehovah involves
far more than words. Jesus said: “If anyone loves me,
he will observe my word.” (John 14:23) And again
speaking as a shepherd, he said: “My sheep listen to
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.”
(John 10:27) Yes, the true test of our love for Christ
is not merely in our words or in our feelings but
mainly in our actions.
18 Our actions, however, do not simply spring from
nowhere. They re?ect the person we are deep inside.
It is here that our work must begin. Jesus said: “This
18, 19. (a) How should learning about Jesus a?ect us? (b) What is the
purpose of this book, and how will it bene?t those who have long considered themselves to be followers of Christ?
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

15

means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of
you, the only true God, and of the one whom you
sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) If we take in
and meditate on accurate knowledge about Jesus,
our heart will be a?ected. We will come to love him
more and more, building in ourselves an ever greater desire to follow him day by day.
19 Herein lies the purpose of this book. Its aim is,
not to give a complete summary of the life and ministry of Jesus, but to help us see more clearly how to
follow him.1 It is designed to help us look into the
mirror of Scripture and ask ourselves, ‘Am I truly
following Jesus?’ (James 1:23-25) Perhaps you have
long considered yourself to be a sheep guided by the
Fine Shepherd. Would you not agree, though, that
we can always ?nd ways to improve? The Bible urges
us: “Keep testing whether you are in the faith, keep
proving what you yourselves are.” (2 Corinthians
13:5) It is worth our every e?ort to make sure that
we are indeed being guided by our loving Fine Shepherd, Jesus, whom Jehovah himself has appointed to
lead us.
1 For a full, chronological summary of the events of Jesus’ life and
ministry, see The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived, published by Jehovah’s
Witnesses.
16

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Invitations From God’s Only-Begotten Son
Imagine that Jesus is directing the following invitations
to you personally. How would you respond, and why?
“Be my follower.”—Matthew 9:9; Luke 9:59;
John 1:43.
“If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown
himself and pick up his torture stake and continually
follow me.”—Matthew 16:24.
“Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded
down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you
and learn from me.”—Matthew 11:28, 29.
“If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.”
—John 7:37.

May your study of this b o ok help you to
strengthen your love for Jesus and for Jehovah. As
such love guides you in life, you will ?nd the greatest measure of peace and contentment possible in
this old world, and you will live to praise Jehovah
forever for providing us with the Fine Shepherd. Of
course, our study of Christ must be based on the
right foundation. It is ?tting, then, that in Chapter 2
we will examine Jesus’ role in Jehovah’s universal
purpose.
20

20. What will we consider in the following chapter?
“BE MY FOLLOWER”—WHAT DID JESUS MEAN?

17

CHAPTER

2

“The Way and the Truth
and the Life”
HAVE you ever been lost? You may recall an occasion when you were traveling to visit a friend or a
relative and could not ?nd the way. As you proceeded along an unfamiliar road, did you stop and ask
someone for directions? Imagine how you would
feel if, instead of just telling you which way to go,
a benevolent individual said: “Just follow me. I will
lead you there.” How relieved you would be!
2

In a sense, Jesus Christ does something like that

for us. On our own, approach to God would be impossible. Because of inherited sin and imperfection, the world of mankind is lost, “alienated from
the life that belongs to God.” (Ephesians 4:17, 18)
We need help to ?nd our way. Jesus, our benevolent Exemplar, does not just o?er advice and directions; he does more. As we saw in Chapter 1, Jesus
invites us, saying: “Come be my follower.” (Mark
1, 2. Why would approach to Jehovah be impossible on our own, and
what has Jesus Christ done for us in this regard?
18

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

10:21) However, he also gives us compelling reason
to accept that invitation. On one occasion, Jesus
said: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No
one comes to the Father except through me.” (John
14:6) Let us discuss some reasons why approach to
the Father is possible only through the Son. Then
with those reasons in mind, we will consider how
Jesus is, indeed, “the way and the truth and the
life.”
3

A Vital Place in Jehovah’s Purpose
First and foremost, approach to God is through

Jesus because Jehovah has seen ?t to give his Son
the most important role.1 The Father has made him
the central, or key, ?gure in the outworking of all
of His purposes. (2 Corinthians 1:20; Colossians 1:
18-20) To understand the vital role of the Son, we
need to consider what happened in the garden of
Eden, where the ?rst human couple joined Satan
in rebelling against Jehovah.—Genesis 2:16, 17; 3:
1-6.
1 So important is the role of the Son that the Bible gives him a
number of prophetic names and titles.—See the box on page 31.

3. Why is approach to God through Jesus?
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

19

4

The rebellion in Eden raised an issue of univer-

sal importance: Does Jehovah God properly exercise his rulership over his creatures? To settle this
vital issue, Jehovah determined that a perfect spirit son would have to go to earth. The mission that
this son would carry out could not have been
weightier—giving his life to vindicate Jehovah’s
sovereignty and to serve as a ransom to save humankind. By remaining faithful to death, the son
chosen would make it possible to solve all the problems raised by Satan’s rebellion. (Hebrews 2:14, 15;
1 John 3:8) But Jehovah had millions upon millions
of perfect spirit sons. (Daniel 7:9, 10) Which one
did he select to carry out this most important assignment? Jehovah chose his “only-begotten Son,”
the one who later came to be known as Jesus
Christ.—John 3:16.
5

Should we be surprised at Jehovah’s choice? By

no means! The Father had the utmost con?dence in
4. The rebellion in Eden raised what issue, and what did Jehovah determine to do in order to settle the issue?
5, 6. How did Jehovah demonstrate that he had con?dence in his Son,
and upon what was this con?dence based?
20

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

his only-begotten Son. Centuries in advance of the
arrival of his Son on earth, Jehovah foretold that
this Son would remain loyal despite undergoing all
manner of su?ering. (Isaiah 53:3-7, 10-12; Acts 8:3235) Consider the implications of that. The Son, like
all other intelligent creatures, was a free moral
agent, able to choose his own course. Yet, Jehovah
had such con?dence that he foretold the faithfulness of his Son. Upon what was this con?dence
based? In a word, knowledge. Jehovah knows his
Son intimately and knows how much his Son wants
to please Him. (John 8:29; 14:31) The Son loves his
Father, and in turn, Jehovah loves His Son. (John
3:35) The love that Father and Son have for each
other forges between them a bond of unity and
trust that is unbreakable.—Colossians 3:14.
6

In view of the important role of the Son, the

con?dence that the Father has in him, and the love
that binds the Father and the Son together, is it
any wonder that approach to God is possible only
through Jesus? Yet, there is another reason why the
Son alone can lead us to the Father.
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

21

7

Only the S on Fully Knows the Father
There are requirements to be met if we are to

gain access to Jehovah. (Psalm 15:1-5) Who knows
better than the Son what it takes to meet God’s
standards and to have His approval? Jesus said: “All
things have been delivered to me by my Father, and
no one fully knows the Son but the Father, neither
does anyone fully know the Father but the Son and
anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.”
(Matthew 11:27) Let us see why Jesus could say,
correctly and without exaggerating, that no one fully knows the Father “but the Son.”
8

As “the ?rstborn of all creation,” the Son has

unique intimacy with Jehovah. (Colossians 1:15)
Imagine the closeness of the Father-Son relationship that developed during the untold ages when it
was just the two of them—from the dawn of creation until other spirit creatures were brought into
existence. (John 1:3; Colossians 1:16, 17) Just think
about the precious opportunity the Son had along7, 8. Why could Jesus correctly say that no one fully knows the Father
“but the Son”?
22

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

side his Father, absorbing the Father’s thoughts on
matters and learning His will, standards, and ways.
Truly, it is by no means an overstatement to say
that Jesus knows his Father better than anyone else
does. This closeness surely enabled Jesus to reveal
his Father in ways that no one else could.
9

The teachings of Jesus re?ected his keen aware-

ness of how Jehovah thinks and feels and of what
He requires of His worshippers.1 Jesus revealed his
Father in yet another profound way. Jesus said: “He
that has seen me has seen the Father also.” (John
14:9) Jesus perfectly imitated his Father in everything he said and did. So when we read in the Bible
about Jesus—the powerful and winsome words that
he used in his teaching, the compassion that moved
him to heal others, and the empathy that caused
him to give way to tears—we might well picture
Jehovah saying and doing those very things. (Matthew 7:28, 29; Mark 1:40-42; John 11:32-36) The
1 See, for example, Jesus’ words recorded at Matthew 10:29-31;
18:12-14, 21-35; 22:36-40.

9, 10. (a) In what ways did Jesus reveal his Father? (b) To have Jehovah’s approval, what must we do?
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

23

ways and will of the Father are perfectly revealed
in the words and actions of the Son. (John 5:19; 8:
28; 12:49, 50) Thus, to have Jehovah’s approval, we
need to heed the teachings of Jesus and follow his
example.—John 14:23.
10

Since Jesus knows Jehovah intimately and imi-

tates him perfectly, it is not surprising that Jehovah has determined that the Son is the means for
approaching the Father. With this foundation for
understanding why we can come to Jehovah only
through Jesus, let us now discuss the meaning of
Jesus’ words: “I am the way and the truth and the
life. No one comes to the Father except through
me.”—John 14:6.
11

“I Am the Way”
We have already learned that there is no ap-

proach to God without going through Jesus. Consider, more speci?cally, what this means for us. Jesus is “the way” in that only through him can we
enter into an approved relationship with God. Why
11. (a) Why can we enter into an approved relationship with God only
through Jesus? (b) How do the words recorded at John 14:6 stress the
uniqueness of Jesus’ position? (See footnote.)
24

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

is that so? By proving faithful to death, Jesus gave
his life as a ransom sacri?ce. (Matthew 20:28) Without this ransom provision, it would be impossible
for us to have access to God. Sin creates a barrier
between humans and God, for Jehovah is holy and
therefore can never approve of sin. (Isaiah 6:3; 59:2)
But the sacri?ce of Jesus removed the barrier; it
provided the necessary covering, or atonement, for
sin. (Hebrews 10:12; 1 John 1:7) If we accept God’s
provision through Christ and put faith in it, we can
enter into Jehovah’s favor. There is simply no other way for us to become “reconciled to God.”1—Romans 5:6-11.
12

Jesus is “the way” when it comes to prayer.

Only through Jesus can we go to Jehovah in prayer
with the assurance that our heartfelt petitions will
be favorably heard. (1 John 5:13, 14) Jesus himself
said: “If you ask the Father for anything he will
give it to you in my name. . . . Ask and you will
1 At John 14:6, the use of the personal pronoun “I” along with the
de?nite article, “the,” stresses that Jesus’ position is unique, that he
is the way, the only one through whom we can approach the Father.

12. Jesus is “the way” in what senses?
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

25

receive, that your joy may be made full.” (John 16:
23, 24) Appropriately, in the name of Jesus, we can
approach Jehovah in prayer and call Him “our Father.” (Matthew 6:9) Jesus is “the way” in yet another sense—by his example. As noted earlier, Jesus perfectly imitated his Father. Jesus’ example
thus shows us how to live so as to please Jehovah.
To approach Jehovah, then, we must walk in the
footsteps of Jesus.—1 Peter 2:21.
13

“I Am . . . the Truth”
Jesus always spoke the truth about his Father’s

prophetic word. (John 8:40, 45, 46) No deception
was ever found in Jesus’ mouth. (1 Peter 2:22) Even
his opposers acknowledged that he taught “the way
of God in line with truth.” (Mark 12:13, 14) However, when Jesus said “I am . . . the truth,” he was
not simply referring to the fact that he made truth
known in his speaking, preaching, and teaching.
More—much more—than talking was involved.
14

Recall that centuries in advance, Jehovah had

13, 14. (a) How was Jesus truthful in his speech? (b) For Jesus to be
“the truth,” what did he have to do, and why?
26

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

inspired Bible writers to record scores of prophecies about the Messiah, or Christ. These prophecies
foretold details about his life, ministry, and death.
In addition, the Mosaic Law contained shadows, or
prophetic patterns, that pointed to the Messiah.
(Hebrews 10:1) Would Jesus prove faithful to death,
thereby ful?lling all the things prophesied about
him? Only then would Jehovah be vindicated as the
God of true prophecy. That tremendous weight
rested upon the shoulders of Jesus. By the way he
lived—every word he spoke and every deed he performed—Jesus brought the prophetic patterns into
the realm of actual truth. (2 Corinthians 1:20)
Thus, Jesus was “the truth.” It was as if the truth
of Jehovah’s prophetic word arrived in the person
of Jesus.—John 1:17; Colossians 2:16, 17.
15

“I Am . . . the Life”
Jesus is “the life,” for it is only through him

that we can receive life—that is, “the real life.”
(1 Timothy 6:19) The Bible says: “He that exercises
15. What does it mean to exercise faith in the Son, and to what can doing so lead?
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

27

faith in the Son has everlasting life; he that disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of
God remains upon him.” (John 3:36) What does it
mean to exercise faith in the Son of God? It means
that we have the conviction that we cannot gain life
without him. More than that, it means that we
demonstrate our faith by works, continue to learn
from Jesus, and do our best to follow his teachings
and example. (James 2:26) Thus, exercising faith
in the Son of God leads to everlasting life—immortal spirit life in heaven for a “little ?ock” of
spirit-anointed Christians and perfect human life in
an earthly paradise for “a great crowd” of “other
sheep.”—Luke 12:32; 23:43; Revelation 7:9-17; John
10:16.
16

What about those who have already died? Jesus

is “the life” for them as well. Shortly before he
raised his friend Lazarus from the dead, Jesus told
Martha, the sister of Lazarus: “I am the resurrection and the life. He that exercises faith in me, even
16, 17. (a) How will Jesus prove to be “the life” even for those who
have died? (b) What con?dence can we have?
28

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

though he dies, will come to life.” (John 11:25) Jehovah has entrusted his Son with “the keys of death
and of Hades,” granting him the power to resurrect.
(Revelation 1:17, 18) With those keys, the glori?ed
Jesus will unlock the gates of Hades and thus release all those being held in mankind’s common
grave.—John 5:28, 29.
17

“I am the way and the truth and the life”—with

this simple statement, Jesus summarized the objective of his life and ministry on earth. Those words
are ?lled with meaning for us today. Recall that Jesus followed up this statement by saying: “No one
comes to the Father except through me.” (John
14:6) Jesus’ words are as relevant today as they were
when he uttered them. We can therefore have full
con?dence that if we follow Jesus, we will never become lost. He, and he alone, will show us the way
“to the Father.”
18

How Will You Respond?
In view of Jesus’ vital role and his intimate

knowledge of the Father, we have good reason to
18. What does being true followers of Jesus involve?
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

29

follow the Son. As we saw in the preceding chapter, being true followers of Jesus involves actions,
not just words or feelings. Following Christ involves patterning our life after his teachings and example. (John 13:15) The study aid that you are now
reading can help you in this endeavor.
19

In the chapters that follow, we will make a care-

ful study of the life and ministry of Jesus. These
chapters are divided into three sections. First, we
will get an overview of his qualities and ways. Second, we will examine his zealous example in preaching and teaching. Third, we will consider how he
manifested love. Starting with Chapter 3, there is a
teaching box entitled “How Can You Follow Jesus?”
The scriptures and questions therein are designed
to help us meditate on how we can imitate Jesus in
word and deed.
20

Thanks to Jehovah God, you do not have to be

lost, alienated from him because of inherited sin.
At great cost to himself, Jehovah lovingly sent
forth his Son to show us the way to come into an
19, 20. What does this study aid contain that can help you in your endeavor to follow Christ?
30

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Some Titles Applied
to Jesus Christ
The Amen (meaning “so be it,” or “surely”). He
is the One in whom God’s promises ?nd sure
ful?llment.—2 Corinthians 1:19, 20.
Eternal Father. Jehovah has granted him the power
and authority to give humans the prospect of
eternal life in perfection on earth.—Isaiah 9:6.
High Priest. He can cleanse us from sin and liberate
us from sin’s death-dealing e?ects.—Hebrews 3:1;
9:13, 14, 25, 26.
King of kings. As a heavenly King appointed by
God, Jesus is far mightier than any earthly ruler.
—Revelation 17:14.
Prince of Peace. As the Ruler of God’s Kingdom,
Jesus will establish on earth a peace that will be
global and will never end.—Isaiah 9:6.
Wonderful Counselor. Jesus’ counsel is always
practical and perfect. Following it leads to
salvation.—Isaiah 9:6; John 6:68.
The Word. He is Jehovah’s Spokesman.—John 1:1.

approved relationship with God. (1 John 4:9, 10)
May you be moved, yes, impelled, to respond to
that great love by accepting and acting upon Jesus’
invitation: “Be my follower.”—John 1:43.
“THE WAY AND THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE”

31

S E C T I O N

1

“COME AND SEE”
THE CHRIST
Jesus lived as a man some 2,000 years ago,
yet it is still possible for us today to
“come and see” the Son of God. (John 1:46)
The Gospel accounts paint a vivid picture
of his personality, attitudes, and ways.
This section will provide an overview of
Jesus’ outstanding qualities.

32

CHAPTER

3

“I Am . . . Lowly in Heart”
JERUSALEM is buzzing with excitement. A great
man is coming! Outside the city, people gather
along the road. They are eager to welcome this man,
for some are saying that he is an heir of King David and the rightful Ruler of Israel. A number bring
palm fronds to wave in greeting; others spread out
garments and tree branches on the road to smooth
the way before him. (Matthew 21:7, 8; John 12:12,
13) Many likely wonder what kind of entry he will
make.
2

Some may be expecting a display of magnif-

icence. They surely know of important men who
made grand entrances. For example, David’s son Absalom proclaimed himself a king; he had 50 men
running ahead of his chariot. (2 Samuel 15:1, 10)
The Roman ruler Julius Caesar demanded even
more fanfare; he once led a triumphal procession
1-3. What is the manner of Jesus’ entry into Jerusalem, and why might
some in the crowd of onlookers be surprised?
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

33

up to the Roman capitol, ?anked by 40 elephants
bearing lamps! Now, however, the people of Jerusalem await a far greater man. Whether the crowds
fully understand that or not, this is the Messiah, the
greatest man ever to live. When this future King
comes into view, though, some may be surprised.
3

They see no chariot, no runners, no horses—and

certainly no elephants. No, Jesus is riding on a lowly beast of burden, an ass.1 No elaborate ?nery bedecks this rider or his mount. Instead of an expensive saddle, there are some garments that Jesus’
close followers have spread over the animal’s back.
Why does Jesus choose to enter Jerusalem in such
a lowly manner, when far lesser men have insisted
on far greater pomp and ceremony?
4

Jesus is ful?lling a prophecy: “Be very joyful . . .

Shout in triumph, O daughter of Jerusalem. Look!
Your king himself comes to you. He is righteous,
1 In discussing this event, one reference work says that these animals “are lowly creatures,” adding: “They are slow, stubborn, the
perennial work animals of the poor, and not too handsome.”

4. What did the Bible foretell about the manner in which the Messianic King would enter Jerusalem?
34

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

yes, saved; humble, and riding upon an ass.” (Zechariah 9:9) This prophecy showed that God’s Anointed One, the Messiah, would one day reveal himself
to the people of Jerusalem as the divinely appointed King. Further, his very manner of doing so, including his choice of a mount, would reveal a beautiful quality of his heart—humility.
5

Jesus’ humility is among his most appealing

qualities, one that is soul-stirring to contemplate. As
we discussed in the preceding chapter, Jesus alone
is “the way and the truth and the life.” (John 14:6)
Clearly, none of the many billions of humans who
have walked this earth has been nearly as important
as God’s Son. Yet, Jesus never showed so much
as a trace of the pride, the haughtiness, or the
self-importance that a?icts countless imperfect humans. To be followers of Christ, we need to ?ght
the tendency to give in to pride. (James 4:6) Remember, Jehovah hates haughtiness. It is vital, then, that
we learn to imitate Jesus’ humility.
5. Why is Jesus’ humility soul-stirring to contemplate, and why is it vital that we learn to imitate Jesus in this regard?
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

35

6

A Long History of Showing Humility
Humility is lowliness of mind, an absence of

haughtiness or pride. It is a quality that begins in the
heart and is manifest in a person’s speech, conduct,
and dealings with others. How did Jehovah know
that the Messiah would be humble? He knew that his
Son re?ected his own perfect example of humility.
(John 10:15) He had also seen the Son’s humility in
action. How so?
7

The book of Jude reveals a fascinating example:

“When Michael the archangel had a di?erence with
the Devil and was disputing about Moses’ body, he
did not dare to bring a judgment against him in abusive terms, but said: ‘May Jehovah rebuke you.’ ”
(Jude 9) Michael is a name applied to Jesus—before
and after his life on earth—in his role as archangel, or chief of Jehovah’s heavenly army of angels.1
1 For more evidence that Michael is Jesus, see pages 218-19 of the
book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

6. What is humility, and how did Jehovah know that the Messiah would
be humble?
7-9. (a) How did Michael display humility in his confrontation with Satan? (b) How might Christians imitate Michael in showing humility?
36

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

(1 Thessalonians 4:16) Note, though, how Michael
handled this confrontation with Satan.
8 Jude’s account does not tell us what Satan wanted to do with Moses’ body, but we can be sure that
the Devil had some vile purpose in mind. Perhaps
he wanted to promote the misuse of that faithful
man’s remains in false worship. While Michael resisted Satan’s wicked scheme, he also showed remarkable self-restraint. Satan surely deserved a rebuke, but Michael, who at the time he was disputing
with Satan had not yet had “all the judging” committed to him, felt that such a judgment should come
only from Jehovah God. (John 5:22) As archangel,
Michael had extensive authority. Yet, he humbly deferred to Jehovah rather than trying to seize additional authority. Besides humility, he also showed
modesty, or an awareness of his limitations.
9 Jude was inspired to write about this incident for
a reason. Sadly, some Christians in Jude’s day were
not humble. They were haughtily “speaking abusively of all the things they really [did] not know.”
(Jude 10) How easy it is for us imperfect humans to
let our pride get the better of us! When we do not
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

37

understand something that is done in the Christian
congregation—perhaps involving a decision made by
the body of elders—how do we react? If we were
to engage in negative, critical talk even though we
cannot know all the factors behind such decisions,
might we not be showing a lack of humility? Let us
instead imitate Michael, or Jesus, holding back from
judging matters over which we have no God-given
authority.
10

God’s Son also showed humility by accepting

the assignment to come to earth. Consider what he
had to leave behind. He was the archangel. He was
also “the Word”—Jehovah’s own Spokesman. (John
1:1-3) He resided in heaven, Jehovah’s “lofty abode
of holiness and beauty.” (Isaiah 63:15) Nonetheless,
the Son “emptied himself and took a slave’s form
and came to be in the likeness of men.” (Philippians
2:7) Think of what his earthly assignment involved!
His life was transferred to the womb of a Jewish virgin, there to develop for nine months to become a
10, 11. (a) What is remarkable about the willingness of God’s Son to
accept the assignment to come to earth? (b) How might we imitate Jesus’ humility?
38

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

human baby. He was born a helpless infant into the
household of a poor carpenter and then grew to be
a toddler, a little boy, and a teenager. Although perfect himself, throughout his youth he remained subject to imperfect human parents. (Luke 2:40, 51, 52)
What extraordinary humility!
11

Can we imitate Jesus’ humility by willingly ac-

cepting assignments of service that at times seem
lowly? For example, our assignment to preach the
good news of God’s Kingdom may seem lowly when
people respond with apathy, ridicule, or hostility. (Matthew 28:19, 20) If we endure in this work,
though, we may help to save lives. At any rate, we
will learn a great deal about humility, and we will
follow in the footsteps of our Master, Jesus Christ.
12

Jesus’ Humility as a Man
From beginning to end, Jesus’ earthly ministry

was marked by humility. He showed it in the way he
directed all praise and glory to his Father. People at
times praised Jesus for the wisdom of his words, the
12-14. (a) How did Jesus show humility when people praised him?
(b) In what ways did Jesus deal humbly with others? (c) What shows
that Jesus’ humility was not just a matter of form or good manners?
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

39

power of his miracles, even the goodness of his character. Again and again, Jesus de?ected such glory
from himself and directed it to Jehovah.—Mark 10:
17, 18; John 7:15, 16.
13

Jesus showed humility in the way he treated peo-

ple. In fact, he made it clear that he came to earth,
not to be served, but to serve others. (Matthew 20:
28) He showed humility in his mild, reasonable dealings with people. When his followers let him down,
he did not berate them; he kept trying to reach their
hearts. (Matthew 26:39-41) When the crowds interrupted his search for quiet, rest, and privacy, he did
not send them away; he continued to give of himself,
teaching them “many things.” (Mark 6:30-34) When
a non-Israelite woman kept begging him to heal her
daughter, he initially indicated that he was not inclined to do so. However, he did not angrily refuse;
he yielded in the light of her extraordinary faith, as
we will discuss in Chapter 14.—Matthew 15:22-28.
14

In countless ways, Jesus lived up to his own

words about himself: “I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart.” (Matthew 11:29) His humility was not
40

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

super?cial, a mere matter of form or good manners.
It came from the heart, his inner self. No wonder,
then, that Jesus placed high priority on teaching his
followers to be humble!
15

Teaching His Followers to B e Humble
Jesus’ apostles were slow to cultivate humility.

Jesus was compelled to try again and again to reach
them. For example, on one occasion James and John
through their mother asked Jesus to promise them
elevated positions in God’s Kingdom. Modestly, Jesus replied: “This sitting down at my right hand and
at my left is not mine to give, but it belongs to those
for whom it has been prepared by my Father.” The
ten other apostles were “indignant” at James and
John. (Matthew 20:20-24) How did Jesus handle this
problem?
16

He kindly reprimanded them all, saying: “You

know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them
and the great men wield authority over them. This is
not the way among you; but whoever wants to become great among you must be your minister, and
15, 16. What contrast did Jesus note regarding the attitude of worldly
rulers and the attitude that his followers needed to cultivate?
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

41

whoever wants to be ?rst among you must be your
slave.” (Matthew 20:25-27) The apostles had likely
seen just how proud, ambitious, and sel?sh “the
rulers of the nations” could be. Jesus showed that
his followers must be di?erent from those powerhungry tyrants. They needed to be humble. Did the
apostles get the point?
17

It was not easy for them. This was neither the

?rst time nor the last time that Jesus taught such a
lesson. Earlier, when they had argued over which
one of them was the greatest, he had set a little child
in their midst and told them to be more like children, who tend to lack the pride, ambition, and concern over rank that are so common in adults. (Matthew 18:1-4) Nonetheless, on the very eve of his
death, he saw that his apostles were still struggling
with pride. He then taught them a very memorable
lesson. He girded himself with a towel and performed the lowliest of duties, one that servants back
then commonly performed for household guests. Je17-19. (a) On the eve of his death, in what memorable way did Jesus
teach his apostles a lesson about humility? (b) What was the most powerful lesson in humility that Jesus taught as a man?
42

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

sus washed the feet of each one of his apostles—including Judas, who was about to betray him!—John
13:1-11.
18

Jesus drove the point home when he told them:

“I set the pattern for you.” (John 13:15) Did this lesson ?nally reach their hearts? Well, later that night,
they had yet another argument as to who was greatest among them! (Luke 22:24-27) Still, Jesus continued to be patient with them and taught them humbly. Then he went on to give the most powerful
lesson of all: “He humbled himself and became obedient as far as death, yes, death on a torture stake.”
(Philippians 2:8) Jesus willingly submitted to a humiliating death, wrongly condemned as a criminal
and a blasphemer. God’s Son thereby proved unique,
for in him among all of Jehovah’s creatures humility found its perfect, its ultimate, expression.
19

Perhaps it was this—the ?nal lesson in humility

that Jesus taught as a man—that engraved the subject so indelibly in the hearts of his faithful apostles.
The Bible tells us that these men were humbly at
work years, even decades, later. What about us?
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

43

20

Will You Follow the Pattern Jesus S et?
Paul admonishes each of us: “Keep this mental

attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 2:5) Like Jesus, we need to be lowly in
heart. How can we know whether humility is in our
heart? Well, Paul reminds us that we should be
“doing nothing out of contentiousness or out of
egotism, but with lowliness of mind considering
that the others are superior to you.” (Philippians
2:3) The key, then, lies in the way we view others in
relation to ourselves. We need to see them as superior, as more important, than we are. Will you apply that counsel?
21

Many years after Jesus’ death, the apostle Peter

was still thinking about the importance of humility.
Peter taught Christian overseers to carry out their
duties humbly, never lording it over Jehovah’s sheep.
(1 Peter 5:2, 3) Responsibility is no license for pride.
On the contrary, responsibility increases the need
for genuine humility. (Luke 12:48) Of course, this
20. How can we know whether we are lowly in heart?
21, 22. (a) Why do Christian overseers need to be humble? (b) How
can we show that we are girded with humility?
44

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

quality is vital not only for overseers but for every
Christian.
22

Peter surely never forgot that night when Jesus

had washed his feet—over Peter’s own objections!
(John 13:6-10) Peter wrote to Christians: “All of you
gird yourselves with lowliness of mind toward one
another.” (1 Peter 5:5) The expression “gird yourselves” suggests the action of a servant who would
gird himself with an apron to carry out menial work.
The phrase might well remind us of the occasion
when Jesus girded himself with a towel before kneeling to perform his task of washing feet. If we follow
Jesus, what God-given assignment could we possibly
consider beneath our dignity? The humility of our
heart should be visible to all, as if we were girded
with it.
23

Haughtiness is like poison. The e?ects can be

devastating. It is a quality that can render the most
gifted human useless to God. Humility, on the other hand, can make even the least one very useful to
23, 24. (a) Why should we resist any tendency toward haughtiness?
(b) The following chapter will help to correct what false notion regarding humility?
“I AM . . . LOWLY IN HEART”

45

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

When you are tempted to boast about your
accomplishments, how might Jesus’ example guide
you?—Matthew 12:15-19; Mark 7:35-37.

?

How might you imitate Jesus’ example in doing
humble work in behalf of spiritual brothers and
sisters?—John 21:1-13.

?

How might you bene?t from Jesus’ example if you
are tempted to seek prominence and success in this
system of things?—John 6:14, 15.

Jehovah. If we cultivate this precious quality daily
by endeavoring to walk humbly in the footsteps of
Christ, the reward is wonderful to contemplate. Peter wrote: “Humble yourselves, therefore, under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.” (1 Peter 5:6) Jehovah certainly exalted Jesus
for humbling himself so completely. Our God will
likewise delight in rewarding you for your humility.
24 Sadly, some think that humility is a sign of
weakness. Jesus’ example helps us to see how false
that notion is, for the humblest of men was also the
most courageous. That will be the subject of the following chapter.
46

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

CHAPTER

4

“Look! The Lion That Is of
the Tribe of Judah”
A MOB is coming after Jesus. Armed with swords
and clubs and with soldiers among them, the men
form a large crowd. As if guided by a single malevolent will, they move through the darkened streets
of Jerusalem and across the Kidron Valley to the
Mount of Olives. The moon is full, yet they carry
torches and lamps. Do they light their way because
clouds block the moonlight? Or do they expect their
quarry to be hiding in the shadows? One thing is certain: Anyone who expects Jesus to cower knows little of the man.
2

Jesus is aware of the danger that approaches.

Nonetheless, he stands and waits. The mob nears, led
by Judas, once a trusted friend. Judas brazenly betrays Jesus, singling out his former master with a
hypocritical greeting and a kiss. Still, Jesus keeps
his composure. Then he steps out before the mob.
1-3. What danger comes upon Jesus, and how does he react?
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

47

“Whom are you looking for?” he asks. “Jesus the
Nazarene,” they reply.
3

Most people would quail in terror before such an

armed mob. Perhaps that is what this crowd expects
of the man before them. But Jesus does not cower,
does not ?ee, does not blurt out some lie. Instead,
he simply says: “I am he.” His manner is so calm,
so brave, that the men are astounded. They stagger backward and fall down!—John 18:1-6; Matthew
26:45-50; Mark 14:41-46.
4

How could Jesus face such extreme danger with

complete composure and self-restraint? The answer,
in a word, is courage. Few qualities are so admired
or so needed in a leader, and no man has ever
equaled, much less excelled, Jesus in this regard. In
the preceding chapter, we learned how humble and
meek Jesus was. He was rightly called “the Lamb.”
(John 1:29) Jesus’ courage, however, gives rise to a
very di?erent description. The Bible says of God’s
Son: “Look! The Lion that is of the tribe of Judah.”
—Revelation 5:5.
4-6. (a) God’s Son is likened to what, and why? (b) What are three ways
in which Jesus displayed courage?
48

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

5

The lion is often linked to courage. Have you ever

stood face-to-face with an adult male lion? If you
have, most likely you were safely separated from the
beast, perhaps by the fence of his enclosure at a zoo.
Still, such an experience can be daunting. As you
look into the face of this huge and powerful creature
and he gazes steadily back at you, you can hardly
imagine the lion ever ?eeing in fear from anything.
The Bible speaks of “the lion, which is the mightiest
among the beasts and which does not turn back from
before anyone.” (Proverbs 30:30) Such is the courage
of Christ.
6

Let us discuss how Jesus displayed lionlike cour-

age in three ways: in standing up for the truth, in upholding justice, and in facing opposition. We will
see, too, that all of us—whether naturally brave or
not—can imitate Jesus in showing courage.
7

He Courageously Stood Up for the Truth
In a world ruled by Satan, “the father of the lie,”

it often takes courage to stand up for the truth.
7-9. (a) What happened when Jesus was 12 years old, and what strikes
you as intimidating about that situation? (b) How did Jesus display courage in dealing with the teachers in the temple?
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

49

(John 8:44; 14:30) Jesus did not wait until adulthood
before taking such a stand. When 12 years old, Jesus
was separated from his parents after the Passover
festival in Jerusalem. For three days, Mary and Joseph searched frantically for the boy. They ?nally
found him in the temple. And what was he doing
there? “Sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and questioning them.” (Luke 2:4150) Consider the setting for that discussion.
8

Historians say that some of the foremost reli-

gious leaders would customarily remain at the temple after festivals and teach at one of the spacious
porches there. People would sit at their feet to listen
and to ask questions. These teachers were learned
men. They were well versed in the Mosaic Law and
also in the endlessly complex man-made laws and
traditions that had multiplied over the years. How
might you have felt sitting in their midst? Intimidated? That would be only natural. And what if you
were just 12 years old? Many young ones are shy.
(Jeremiah 1:6) Some try desperately to avoid attracting the attention of their teachers in school; these
50

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

youths fear being called on, fear being singled out,
fear the possibility of being embarrassed or ridiculed.
9

Yet, here we ?nd Jesus, sitting in the midst of

those learned men, fearlessly asking them probing
questions. And he did still more. The account tells
us: “All those listening to him were in constant
amazement at his understanding and his answers.”
(Luke 2:47) The Bible does not tell us what he said
on that occasion, but we can be con?dent that he
did not parrot the falsehoods that were so favored
among those religious teachers. (1 Peter 2:22) No, he
upheld the truth of God’s Word, and his listeners
were surely amazed that a 12-year-old boy could express himself with such insight and courage.
10

Today, countless young Christians are follow-

ing in Jesus’ footsteps. Granted, they are not perfect, as young Jesus was. Like him, though, they
do not wait to reach adulthood before standing
up for the truth. At school or in the communities where they live, they tactfully ask people
10. How do young Christians today imitate Jesus’ courage?
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

51

questions, listen, and respectfully share with them
the truth. (1 Peter 3:15) As a group, these young
ones have helped classmates, teachers, and neighbors to become followers of Christ. How their
courage must please Jehovah! His Word likens
such youths to dewdrops—refreshing, pleasing,
and numerous.—Psalm 110:3.
11

In manhood, Jesus showed courage again and

again in defending the truth. In fact, his ministry
opened with a confrontation that many would call
terrifying. Not as the mighty archangel, but as a
mere man of ?esh and blood, Jesus had to face Satan, the most powerful and dangerous of all of Jehovah’s enemies. Jesus rejected Satan and refuted his
misapplication of inspired Scripture. Jesus ended
the encounter by commanding boldly: “Go away, Satan!”—Matthew 4:2-11.
12

Jesus thus set the pattern for his ministry, brave-

ly defending his Father’s Word against e?orts to
twist it or misuse it. Then, as now, such religious dishonesty was all too common. Jesus told religious
11, 12. As an adult, how did Jesus show courage in defending the truth?
52

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

leaders of his day: “You make the word of God invalid by your tradition which you handed down.”
(Mark 7:13) Those men were greatly revered by the
people in general, but Jesus fearlessly denounced
them as blind guides and hypocrites.1 (Matthew 23:
13, 16) How can we imitate this aspect of Jesus’ courageous example?
13

We remember, of course, that we have neither Je-

sus’ ability to read hearts nor his authority to judge.
However, we can imitate his bold defense of the
truth. For example, by exposing religious falsehoods
—the lies so often taught about God, his purposes,
and his Word—we shed light in a world bedarkened
by Satan’s propaganda. (Matthew 5:14; Revelation
12:9, 10) We help to free people from enslavement to
false teachings that ?ll their hearts with morbid fear
and that poison their relationship with God. What a
privilege we have to see the ful?llment of Jesus’
promise: “The truth will set you free”!—John 8:32.
1 Historians have noted that the tombs of the rabbis were venerated
in much the same way as were the tombs of prophets and patriarchs.

13. What do we need to remember in imitating Jesus, yet what privilege
do we have?
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

53

14

He Courageously Upheld Justice
Bible prophecy foretold that the Messiah would

clarify to the nations “what justice is.” (Matthew 12:
18; Isaiah 42:1) Jesus certainly began to do so while
here on earth. With great courage, he proved ever
just and impartial in his dealings with people. For
example, he refused to adopt the unscriptural prejudices and bigotry that were so prevalent in the
world around him.
15

When Jesus spoke to a Samaritan woman at the

well of Sychar, his disciples were surprised. Why? In
those days, the Jews in general detested the Samaritans; this disdain reached back many, many years.
(Ezra 4:4) Furthermore, some rabbis held a disparaging view of women. The rabbinic rules, later put into
writing, discouraged a man from conversing with a
woman; they even suggested that women were unworthy of being taught God’s Law. Samaritan women in particular were viewed as unclean. Jesus ignored such unjust prejudices and openly taught the
14, 15. (a) What is one way in which Jesus made clear “what justice
is”? (b) In speaking to a Samaritan woman, what prejudices did Jesus
ignore?
54

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Samaritan woman (who was living an immoral life),
even revealing to her his identity as the Messiah.
—John 4:5-27.
16

Have you ever found yourself in company with

those who harbor ugly prejudices? Perhaps they joke
contemptuously about people of another race or nation, speak disparagingly about members of the opposite sex, or look down on those of a di?erent economic or social status. Followers of Christ do not
sympathize with such hateful views, and they work
hard to eradicate any trace of prejudice in their own
hearts. (Acts 10:34) Each of us needs to cultivate the
courage to be just in this regard.
17

Courage also led Jesus to ?ght for the cleanness

of God’s people and for the arrangement for pure
worship. Early in his ministry, he entered the temple area in Jerusalem and was appalled to see merchants and money changers operating their businesses there. Filled with righteous indignation, Jesus
threw those greedy men and their merchandise out
16. Why do Christians need the courage to be di?erent when it comes
to prejudice?
17. What action did Jesus take in the temple, and why?
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

55

of there. (John 2:13-17) He took similar action later,
near the close of his ministry. (Mark 11:15-18) These
deeds surely made him some powerful enemies, yet
he did not hesitate. Why? From childhood, he called
that temple his Father’s house—and he meant it.
(Luke 2:49) To pollute the pure worship carried on
there was an injustice he could never condone. His
zeal gave him the courage to do what was needed.
18

Christ’s followers today likewise care deeply

about the cleanness of God’s people and the arrangement for pure worship. If they see that a fellow Christian is involved in serious wrongdoing, they
do not simply turn a blind eye. They courageously
speak up. (1 Corinthians 1:11) They make sure that
the congregation elders are informed. The elders can
help those who are spiritually sick and can also take
action to preserve the clean standing of Jehovah’s
sheep.—James 5:14, 15.
19

Should we conclude, though, that Jesus fought

18. How may Christians today show courage when it comes to the cleanness of the congregation?
19, 20. (a) What injustices were rampant in Jesus’ day, and what pressure did Jesus face? (b) Why do Christ’s followers refuse to get involved
in politics and violence, and what is one reward for their stand?
56

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

social injustice in the world at large? There certainly were injustices all around him. His homeland was
occupied by a foreign power. The Romans oppressed
the Jews with a powerful military presence, taxed
them heavily, and even interfered with their religious customs. Not surprisingly, many people wanted Jesus to get involved in the politics of his day.
(John 6:14, 15) Again, his courage had to come into
play.
20

Jesus explained that his Kingdom was no part of

the world. By his example, he trained his followers
to keep out of the political ?ghts of the day and to
focus instead on preaching the good news of God’s
Kingdom. (John 17:16; 18:36) He taught a powerful
lesson regarding neutrality when the mob came to
arrest him. Peter sprang into action, impulsively
swinging his sword and injuring a man. It is easy to
sympathize with Peter. If ever violence might have
seemed justi?ed, it was on that night, when God’s innocent Son was attacked. Yet, Jesus then set the standard for his earthly followers down to this day: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

57

the sword will perish by the sword.” (Matthew 26:5154) For Christ’s followers, maintaining such a peaceful stand surely took courage then, as it does today.
As a result of their Christian neutrality, God’s people today have a clean record when it comes to the
countless modern-day wars, holocausts, riots, and
similar acts of violence. That sterling record is one
reward for their courage.
21

He Courageously Faced Opposition
Jehovah’s Son knew well in advance that he

would face severe opposition when here on earth.
(Isaiah 50:4-7) He faced many threats of death, culminating in the one described at the outset of this
chapter. How did Jesus maintain his courage in the
face of such dangers? Well, what was Jesus doing before that mob came to arrest him? He was praying
fervently to Jehovah. And what did Jehovah do? The
Bible tells us that Jesus “was favorably heard.” (Hebrews 5:7) Jehovah sent an angel from heaven to
strengthen his brave Son.—Luke 22:42, 43.
22

Shortly after being strengthened, Jesus said to

21, 22. (a) Jesus received what help before facing the hardest of his
trials? (b) How did Jesus prove courageous to the end?
58

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

his apostles: “Get up, let us go.” (Matthew 26:46)
Think of the bravery in those words. “Let us go,” he
said, knowing that he would ask the mob to spare his
friends, knowing that those companions would abandon him and ?ee, and knowing that he would go on
alone to face the hardest ordeal of his life. Alone, he
faced an illegal and unjust trial, ridicule, torture,
and an agonizing death. Throughout it all, his courage never failed him.
23 Was Jesus being reckless? No; recklessness has
little to do with true courage. In fact, Jesus taught
his followers to be cautious, to withdraw prudently
from danger in order to continue doing God’s will.
(Matthew 4:12; 10:16) In this case, though, Jesus
knew that there was no way to withdraw. He knew
what God’s will involved. Jesus was determined to
keep his integrity, so the only way to go was forward,
right into the trial.
24 How often Jesus’ followers have walked courageously in their Master’s footsteps! Many have
23. Explain why Jesus was not reckless in the way that he faced danger and the threat of death.
24. Why may we be assured that we can prove courageous in the face
of any trial that may arise?
“LOOK! THE LION THAT IS OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH”

59

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

How can Jesus’ example help you to speak
courageously, even if people ?nd the truths you
share o?ensive?—John 8:31-59.

?

Why should we never let a morbid dread of Satan
or his demons hold us back from helping others?
—Matthew 8:28-34; Mark 1:23-28.

?

Why should we be willing to risk persecution in
order to show compassion for the downtrodden?
—John 9:1, 6, 7, 22-41.

?

How did Jesus’ hope for the future help him
to face trials, and how can your hope give you
courage?—John 16:28; 17:5; Hebrews 12:2.

stood ?rm in the face of ridicule, persecution, arrest,
imprisonment, torture, and even death. Where do
imperfect humans get such courage? It does not simply arise from within. As Jesus received help from
above, so do his followers. (Philippians 4:13) Never
fear, then, what the future may bring. Be determined
to keep your integrity, and Jehovah will give you the
courage you need. Keep drawing strength from the
example of our Leader, Jesus, who said: “Take courage! I have conquered the world.”—John 16:33.
60

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

CHAPTER

5

“All the Treasures of Wisdom”
IT IS a spring day in 31 C.E. Jesus Christ is near Capernaum, a bustling city on the northwest shores of
the Sea of Galilee. Up on a mountain in the vicinity, Jesus has prayed in solitude the entire night. As
the morning unfolds, he calls his disciples, and from
among them he chooses 12, whom he names apostles. Meanwhile, great crowds of people—some from
considerable distances—have followed Jesus to this
location and are assembled at a level place on the
mountain. They are eager to hear what he has to say
and to be healed of their ailments. Jesus does not
disappoint them.—Luke 6:12-19.
Jesus approaches the crowds and heals all who
are sick. Finally, when not one among them feels the
pain of serious illness, he sits down and begins to
teach.1 His words spoken in the spring air that day
2

1 The discourse Jesus delivered that day has come to be known
as the Sermon on the Mount. As recorded at Matthew 5:3–7:27, it
contains 107 verses and would likely take just 20 minutes or so to deliver.

1-3. What is the setting for the sermon that Jesus delivers on a spring
day in 31 C.E., and why are his listeners astounded?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

61

must surprise his listeners. After all, they have never heard anyone teach as he does. To give weight
to his teachings, he appeals neither to oral traditions nor to well-known Jewish rabbis. Rather, he repeatedly quotes the inspired Hebrew Scriptures. His
message is straightforward, his wording simple, his
meaning clear. When he is ?nished, the crowds are
astounded. Indeed, they should be. They have just
listened to the wisest man who ever lived!—Matthew
7:28, 29.
3 That sermon along with many other things that
Jesus said and did is recorded in God’s Word. We do
well to dig into what that inspired record says about
Jesus, for in him are “all the treasures of wisdom.”
(Colossians 2:3) Where did he get such wisdom—the
ability to put knowledge and understanding to work
in a practical way? How did he manifest wisdom, and
how can we follow his example?
“Where Did This Man Get This Wisdom?”
4 During one of his preaching tours, Jesus visited
Nazareth, the town where he had been reared, and
began teaching in the synagogue there. Many of his
4. What question did Jesus’ listeners in Nazareth raise, and why?
62

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

listeners were amazed and wondered: “Where did
this man get this wisdom?” They knew his family
—his parents and siblings—and they were aware that
he had come from humble circumstances. (Matthew
13:54-56; Mark 6:1-3) They no doubt also knew that
this eloquent carpenter had not attended any of the
prestigious rabbinic schools. (John 7:15) Their question thus seemed logical.
5 The wisdom Jesus manifested was not simply the
product of his perfect mind. Later in his ministry,
when teaching openly in the temple, Jesus revealed
that his wisdom was from a far loftier source. “What
I teach is not mine,” he said, “but belongs to him
that sent me.” (John 7:16) Yes, the Father, who sent
forth the Son, was the real source of Jesus’ wisdom.
(John 12:49) How, though, did Jesus receive wisdom
from Jehovah?
6 Jehovah’s holy spirit was at work in Jesus’ heart
and mind. Concerning Jesus as the promised Messiah, Isaiah foretold: “Upon him the spirit of Jehovah
must settle down, the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of mightiness, the
5. Jesus revealed that his wisdom was from what source?
6, 7. In what ways did Jesus receive wisdom from his Father?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

63

spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.” (Isaiah 11:2) With Jehovah’s spirit resting upon him and
guiding his thinking and decisions, is it any wonder
that Jesus’ words and actions re?ected superlative
wisdom?
7 Jesus gained wisdom from his Father in another
profound way. As we saw in Chapter 2, during his
prehuman existence, which spanned countless ages,
Jesus had the opportunity to absorb his Father’s
thoughts on matters. We cannot begin to imagine the
depth of wisdom that the Son gained at his Father’s
side, laboring as God’s “master worker” in the creation of all other things, both animate and inanimate. For good reason, the Son in his prehuman existence is described as wisdom personi?ed. (Proverbs
8:22-31; Colossians 1:15, 16) Throughout his ministry, Jesus was able to draw on the wisdom he had
gained alongside his Father in heaven.1 (John 8:26,
28, 38) Therefore, we need hardly be surprised at the
breadth of knowledge and depth of understanding
re?ected in Jesus’ words or at the soundness of judgment evident in his every deed.
1 Evidently, when “the heavens were opened up” at the time of Jesus’ baptism, the memory of his prehuman existence was restored to
him.—Matthew 3:13-17.
64

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

As followers of Jesus, we too need to look to Jehovah as the source of wisdom. (Proverbs 2:6) Of
course, Jehovah does not impart miraculous wisdom
to us. He does, however, answer our earnest prayers
for the wisdom necessary to deal successfully with
the challenges of life. (James 1:5) To gain that wisdom requires much e?ort on our part. We need to
keep seeking for it “as for hid treasures.” (Proverbs
2:1-6) Yes, we need to continue digging deep down
into God’s Word, wherein his wisdom is revealed,
and to bring our life into harmony with what we
learn. The example of Jehovah’s Son is especially
valuable in helping us to acquire wisdom. Let us examine several areas in which Jesus manifested wisdom and learn how we can imitate him.
8

Words of Wisdom
9 People in great numbers ?ocked to Jesus just to
hear him speak. (Mark 6:31-34; Luke 5:1-3) And no
wonder, for when Jesus opened his mouth, words
of surpassing wisdom issued forth! His teachings
re?ected a deep knowledge of God’s Word and a
matchless ability to get to the heart of matters. His
8. As followers of Jesus, how may we gain wisdom?
9. What made Jesus’ teachings so wise?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

65

teachings are universal in their appeal and timeless
in their application. Consider some examples of the
wisdom found in the words of Jesus, the foretold
“Wonderful Counselor.”—Isaiah 9:6.
10 The Sermon on the Mount, referred to at the
outset, is the largest collection of Jesus’ teachings
not interrupted by narrative or the words of others.
In this sermon, Jesus does not simply advise us to
pursue proper speech and conduct. His counsel goes
much deeper than that. Well aware that thoughts
and feelings lead to words and actions, Jesus urges
us to cultivate positive qualities of mind and heart,
such as mildness of temper, a hunger for righteousness, an inclination to be merciful and peaceable,
and love for others. (Matthew 5:5-9, 43-48) As we
build up such qualities in our heart, the result will
be wholesome speech and conduct that not only
please Jehovah but also promote good relationships
with fellow humans.—Matthew 5:16.
11 When giving counsel on sinful behavior, Jesus
gets to the very root of the matter. He does not sim10. What positive qualities does Jesus urge us to cultivate, and why?
11. When giving counsel on sinful behavior, how does Jesus get to the
root of the matter?
66

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ply tell us to refrain from violent acts. Rather, he
warns us not to allow anger to smolder in our heart.
(Matthew 5:21, 22; 1 John 3:15) He does not only forbid the act of adultery. Instead, he warns of the passion that begins in the heart and leads to such betrayal. He admonishes us not to allow our eyes to
arouse improper desire and stimulate lust. (Matthew
5:27-30) Jesus deals with causes, not just symptoms.
He addresses the attitudes and desires that give
birth to sinful deeds.—Psalm 7:14.
What wisdom there is in the words of Jesus!
Little wonder that “the crowds were astounded at
his way of teaching.” (Matthew 7:28) As his followers, we view his wise counsel as a pattern for
living. We seek to cultivate the positive qualities
he recommended—including mercy, peaceableness,
and love—knowing that we will thus be laying a
foundation for godly conduct. We endeavor to root
out of our heart the negative feelings and desires
he warned against, such as bitter anger and immoral longings, knowing that doing so will help us to
avoid sinful conduct.—James 1:14, 15.
12

12. How do followers of Jesus view his counsel, and why?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

67

A Way of Life Governed by Wisdom
13 Jesus manifested wisdom not only in word but
also in deed. His entire manner of life—his decisions, his view of himself, and his dealings with others—demonstrated wisdom in its many beautiful facets. Consider some examples showing that Jesus was
governed by “practical wisdom and thinking ability.”
—Proverbs 3:21.
14 Wisdom includes sound judgment. Jesus used
good judgment in choosing his life course. Can you
imagine the life that he could have made for himself
—the home he could have constructed, the business
he could have built up, or the worldly prominence
he could have achieved? Jesus knew that a life devoted to those pursuits “is vanity and a striving after the wind.” (Ecclesiastes 4:4; 5:10) Such a course is
foolishness, the opposite of wisdom. Jesus chose to
keep his life simple. He was not interested in making
money or accumulating material possessions. (Matthew 8:20) In line with what he taught, he kept his
eye focused on a single purpose—the doing of God’s
will. (Matthew 6:22) Jesus wisely devoted his time
13, 14. What shows that Jesus used good judgment in choosing his life
course?
68

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

and energy to Kingdom interests, which are far more
important and rewarding than material things. (Matthew 6:19-21) He thus left behind an example worthy
of imitation.
15 Followers of Jesus today see the wisdom of keeping a simple eye. They therefore avoid weighing
themselves down with unnecessary debt and with
mundane pursuits that consume too much attention
and energy. (1 Timothy 6:9, 10) Many have taken
steps to simplify their lifestyle so that they can
devote more time to the Christian ministry, perhaps even serving as full-time Kingdom proclaimers.
There could hardly be a wiser course to pursue, for
keeping Kingdom interests in their rightful place
results in the greatest happiness and satisfaction.
—Matthew 6:33.
16 The Bible associates wisdom with modesty,
which includes being aware of our limitations.
(Proverbs 11:2) Jesus was modest and realistic in what
he expected of himself. He knew that he was not
15. How can followers of Jesus demonstrate that they are keeping a simple eye, and why is this the course of wisdom?
16, 17. (a) In what ways did Jesus demonstrate that he was modest and
realistic in what he expected of himself? (b) How may we show that we
are modest and realistic in what we expect of ourselves?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

69

going to convert everyone who heard his message.
(Matthew 10:32-39) He also realized that there was
a limit to the number of people that he would
personally be able to reach. So he wisely entrusted the disciple-making work to his followers. (Matthew 28:18-20) He modestly acknowledged that they
would “do works greater than” his own, for they
would reach more people over a greater area and for
a longer period of time. (John 14:12) Jesus also recognized that he was not beyond needing help. He accepted the aid of the angels who came to minister to
him in the wilderness and of the angel who came to
strengthen him in Gethsemane. In his moment of
greatest need, the Son of God cried out for help.
—Matthew 4:11; Luke 22:43; Hebrews 5:7.
17 We too need to be modest and realistic in what
we expect of ourselves. We certainly want to work
whole-souled and to exert ourselves vigorously in
the preaching and disciple-making work. (Luke 13:
24; Colossians 3:23) At the same time, we need to remember that Jehovah does not compare us with one
another, nor should we. (Galatians 6:4) Practical
wisdom will help us to set realistic goals in accord
with our abilities and circumstances. In addition,
70

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

wisdom will guide those in positions of responsibility to acknowledge that they have limitations and
that they need help and support from time to time.
Modesty will enable such ones to accept the help
graciously, recognizing that Jehovah may well use a
fellow believer to become “a strengthening aid” to
them.—Colossians 4:11.
18 “The wisdom from above is . . . reasonable,” says
James 3:17. Jesus was reasonable and positive in dealing with his disciples. He was well aware of their
faults, yet he looked for the good in them. (John 1:
47) He knew that they were going to abandon him on
the night of his arrest, but he did not doubt their loyalty. (Matthew 26:31-35; Luke 22:28-30) Peter three
times denied even knowing Jesus. Still, Jesus made
supplication in Peter’s behalf and expressed con?dence in his faithfulness. (Luke 22:31-34) On the last
night of his earthly life, Jesus in prayer to his Father did not focus on the mistakes his disciples had
made. Rather, he spoke positively about their course
up to that night, saying: “They have observed your
18, 19. (a) What shows that Jesus was reasonable and positive in dealing with his disciples? (b) Why do we have good reason to be positive
and reasonable in dealing with one another, and how can we do so?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

71

word.” (John 17:6) Despite their imperfections, he
placed in their hands the Kingdom-preaching and
disciple-making work. (Matthew 28:19, 20) The con?dence and faith that he expressed in them no doubt
strengthened them to carry out the work he commanded them to do.
Followers of Jesus have reason to imitate his example in this regard. If the perfect Son of God was
patient in dealing with his imperfect disciples, how
much more should we as sinful humans be reasonable in our dealings with one another! (Philippians
4:5) Rather than focusing on the shortcomings of fellow worshippers, we do well to look for the good in
them. We are wise to remember that Jehovah has
drawn them. (John 6:44) Surely, then, he must see
some measure of good in them, and so should we. A
positive spirit will help us not only to “overlook
faults” but also to search out areas in which we can
commend others. (Proverbs 19:11, The New English
Bible) When we express con?dence in our Christian
brothers and sisters, we help them to do their best
in serving Jehovah and to ?nd joy in that service.
—1 Thessalonians 5:11.
19

72

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

If you sense that you o?ended a fellow believer,
what is the course of wisdom?—Matthew 5:23, 24.
? When you are insulted or provoked, how
might Jesus’ words help you to respond wisely?
—Matthew 5:38-42.
? How could meditating on Jesus’ words help you
to keep a balanced view of money and possessions?
—Matthew 6:24-34.
? When setting priorities in your life, how might
following Jesus’ example help you to make a wise
decision?—Luke 4:43; John 4:34.

The Gospel accounts of Jesus’ life and ministry
truly are a treasure trove of wisdom! What should we
do with this priceless gift? At the conclusion of the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus urged his audience not just to
hear his wise sayings but also to do, or apply, them.
(Matthew 7:24-27) Molding our thoughts, motivations,
and actions according to Jesus’ wise words and deeds
will help us to ?nd the best possible life now and to stay
on the road to everlasting life. (Matthew 7:13, 14) Surely there is no better or wiser course that we could take!
20

20. What should we do with the treasure trove of wisdom found in the
Gospel accounts, and why?
“ALL THE TREASURES OF WISDOM”

73

CHAPTER

6

“He Learned Obedience”
A FATHER looks out the window, watching his
young son at play with some friends. Their ball
bounces out of the yard and into the street. The boy
looks longingly after it. One of his friends urges him
to run out into the street to get it, but the boy shakes
his head. “I’m not allowed to do that,” he says. The
father smiles to himself.
2

Why is the father so pleased? Because he has in-

structed his son not to go out into the street alone.
When the boy obeys—even though he does not know
that his father is watching—the father knows that
his son is learning obedience and is much safer as a
result. That father feels as does our heavenly Father,
Jehovah. God knows that if we are to remain faithful and live to see the wonderful future he has in
store for us, we must learn to trust in him and obey
him. (Proverbs 3:5, 6) To that end, he sent us the best
of all human teachers.
1, 2. Why is a loving father pleased to see his son obey him, and how
do his feelings re?ect Jehovah’s feelings?
74

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

3

The Bible says something amazing about Jesus:

“Although he was a Son, he learned obedience from
the things he su?ered; and after he had been made
perfect he became responsible for everlasting salvation to all those obeying him.” (Hebrews 5:8, 9) This
Son had existed for countless ages in heaven. He saw
Satan and his fellow rebel angels disobey, but the
?rstborn Son never joined them. Inspired prophecy
applied these words to him: “I . . . was not rebellious.” (Isaiah 50:5) How, then, could the words “he
learned obedience” apply to this perfectly obedient
Son? How could such a perfect creature be “made
perfect”?
4 Consider an illustration. A soldier has an iron
sword. Although it has never been tested in battle, it
is perfectly formed and well crafted. However, he
trades that sword for one made of a stronger metal,
hardened steel. This new sword has already served
well in battle. Is that not a wise trade? Similarly, the
obedience Jesus demonstrated before he came to the
earth was ?awless. But after his sojourn here, his
3, 4. How is it that Jesus “learned obedience” and was “made perfect”?
Illustrate.
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

75

obedience was of an altogether di?erent quality. It
was now tested, hardened, as it were, and proved by
trials that Jesus could never have encountered in
heaven.
5 Obedience was central to Jesus’ mission in coming to the earth. As “the last Adam,” Jesus came here
to do what our ?rst parent failed to do—remain obedient to Jehovah God, even under test. (1 Corinthians 15:45) Yet, Jesus’ obedience was not mechanical.
Jesus obeyed with all his mind, heart, and soul. And
he did it with joy. Doing his Father’s will was more
important to him than was eating! (John 4:34) What
will help us to imitate Jesus’ obedience? Let us ?rst
consider his motives. Cultivating motives like his
will help us both to resist temptation and to carry
out God’s will. We will then review some rewards
that result from manifesting Christlike obedience.
Jesus’ Motives for Obedience
6 Jesus’ obedience stemmed from what was in his
heart. As we saw in Chapter 3, Christ was humble at
heart. Arrogant pride makes people disdain obedi5. What made Jesus’ obedience so important, and what will we consider in this chapter?
6, 7. What were some of Jesus’ motives for obedience?
76

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ence, whereas humility helps us to obey Jehovah
willingly. (Exodus 5:1, 2; 1 Peter 5:5, 6) Further, Jesus’ obedience arose from what he loved and from
what he hated.
7 Above all, Jesus loved his heavenly Father, Jehovah. That love will be discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 13. Such love gave rise to Jesus’ godly fear.
So intense was his love for Jehovah, so profound his
reverence, that he feared to displease his Father.
Godly fear was one reason why Jesus’ prayers were
favorably heard. (Hebrews 5:7) Fear of Jehovah is
also an outstanding mark of Jesus’ rule as Messianic King.—Isaiah 11:3.
8 Love for Jehovah also involves hatred for what
Jehovah hates. Note, for example, this prophecy addressed to the Messianic King: “You have loved righteousness and you hate wickedness. That is why
God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your partners.” (Psalm 45:7) Jesus’ “partners” were the other kings in the family
line of King David. More than any of them, Jesus has
8, 9. As prophesied, how did Jesus feel about righteousness and wickedness, and how did he make those feelings evident?
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

77

cause for exultation, or intense joy, at his anointing.
Why? His reward is far greater than theirs, his kingship in?nitely more bene?cial. He is rewarded because his love of righteousness and hatred of wickedness moved him to obey God in all things.
9 How did Jesus make his feelings regarding righteousness and wickedness evident? For instance,
when his followers obeyed his direction in the
preaching work and were blessed as a result, how
did Jesus react? He was overjoyed. (Luke 10:1, 17,
21) And when the people of Jerusalem repeatedly
showed a disobedient spirit, rejecting his loving efforts to help them, how did Jesus feel? He wept because of that city’s rebellious course. (Luke 19:41,
42) Jesus felt very deeply about conduct both good
and bad.
10 Meditating on Jesus’ feelings helps us to examine our own motives for obeying Jehovah. Imperfect
though we are, we can cultivate a heartfelt love of
good deeds and an earnest hatred of wrong conduct.
We need to pray to Jehovah, asking him to help us
10. What feelings do we need to cultivate when it comes to righteous
deeds and wrong acts, and what will help us do so?
78

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

to cultivate feelings that are like his and like those
of his Son. (Psalm 51:10) At the same time, we need
to avoid in?uences that will erode such feelings.
Careful choices of entertainment and associations
are essential. (Proverbs 13:20; Philippians 4:8) If we
cultivate Christlike motives, our obedience will not
be a mere formality. We will do what is right because
we love to do it. We will avoid wrong deeds, not because we fear getting caught, but because we hate
such conduct.
11

“He Committed No Sin”
In regard to his hatred of sin, Jesus was tested

early in his ministry. After his baptism, he spent
40 days and nights in the wilderness without food.
At the end of that period, Satan came to tempt him.
Note how crafty the Devil was.—Matthew 4:1-11.
12 Satan ?rst said: “If you are a son of God, tell
these stones to become loaves of bread.” (Matthew
4:3) How did Jesus feel after his long fast? The Bible
plainly says: “He felt hungry.” (Matthew 4:2) So Satan played on the natural desire for food, no doubt
11, 12. (a) What happened to Jesus early in his ministry? (b) How did
Satan ?rst tempt Jesus, using what crafty tactics?
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

79

deliberately waiting until Jesus was in a physically
weakened state. Notice, too, Satan’s taunting phrase:
“If you are a son of God.” Satan knew that Jesus was
“the ?rstborn of all creation.” (Colossians 1:15) Still,
Jesus did not allow Satan to provoke him into disobedience. Jesus knew that it was not God’s will that
he use his power for sel?sh ends. He refused to do
so, showing that he humbly relied on Jehovah for
sustenance and direction.—Matthew 4:4.
13 For his second temptation, Satan took Jesus to
a lofty spot on the temple battlement. Cleverly twisting God’s Word, Satan tempted Jesus to make a
showy display by hurling himself down from that
height so that angels would have to rescue him. If
the crowds at the temple saw such a miracle, would
anyone thereafter dare raise a doubt that Jesus was
the promised Messiah? And if the crowds accepted
Jesus as the Messiah on the basis of such showmanship, might Jesus not avoid a lot of hardship and
trouble? Perhaps. But Jesus knew that it was Jehovah’s will for the Messiah to carry out his work in a
13-15. (a) What were Satan’s second and third temptations of Jesus,
and how did Jesus respond? (b) How do we know that Jesus was never
able to let down his guard against Satan?
80

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

humble manner, not to in?uence people to believe
in him by means of spectacular displays. (Isaiah 42:
1, 2) Again, Jesus refused to disobey Jehovah. Fame
held no lure for him.
14 What, though, about the lure of power? In his
third attempt, Satan o?ered Jesus all the kingdoms
of the world if Jesus would perform a single act of
worship to Satan. Did he seriously consider Satan’s
o?er? “Go away, Satan!” was his reply. He added:
“For it is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must
worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’ ” (Matthew 4:10) Nothing would ever
induce Jesus to worship another god. No o?er of
power or in?uence in this world would sway him to
commit any act of disobedience.
15 Did Satan give up? He did leave at Jesus’ command. However, Luke’s Gospel states that the Devil
“retired from him until another convenient time.”
(Luke 4:13) Indeed, Satan would ?nd other occasions to test and to tempt Jesus, right down to the
end. The Bible tells us that Jesus was “tested in all
respects.” (Hebrews 4:15) So Jesus was never able to
let down his guard; nor are we.
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

81

Satan continues to tempt God’s servants today.
Sadly, our imperfections often make us easy targets.
Satan craftily appeals to sel?shness, pride, and greed
for power. Using the lure of materialism, Satan may
even appeal to all of these at once! It is vital that we
pause, at times, for honest self-examination. We do
well to meditate on the words of 1 John 2:15-17. As
we do, we might ask ourselves if the ?eshly desires
of this system of things, the yearning for material
possessions, and the desire to impress others have to
some extent eroded our love for our heavenly Father. We need to remember that this world is on its
way out, as is its ruler, Satan. Let us reject his crafty
e?orts to lure us into sin! May we be inspired by our
Master, for “he committed no sin.”—1 Peter 2:22.
16

“I Always Do the Things Pleasing to Him”
17 Obedience involves far more than refraining
from sin; Christ actively carried out his Father’s
every command. He declared: “I always do the
things pleasing to him.” (John 8:29) This obedience
16. How does Satan tempt God’s servants today, and how may we reject his e?orts?
17. How did Jesus feel about obeying his Father, yet what objection may
some raise?
82

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

brought Jesus great joy. Of course, some might object that obedience was less complicated for Jesus.
They might imagine that he had to answer only to
Jehovah, who is perfect, whereas we often have to
answer to imperfect humans in positions of authority. The truth is, though, that Jesus was obedient to
imperfect humans who had positions of authority.
18 As he was growing up, Jesus was under the authority of his imperfect human parents, Joseph and
Mary. Likely, more than most children, he could see
?aws in his parents. Did he rebel, stepping out of his
God-given role and telling them how to manage a
family? Note what Luke 2:51 says of 12-year-old Jesus: “He continued subject to them.” In this obedience, he set an excellent example for Christian
youths, who strive to obey their parents and show
them due respect.—Ephesians 6:1, 2.
19 When it comes to obeying imperfect humans, Jesus faced challenges that true Christians today never have to face. Consider the unique times in which
18. As a youth, Jesus set what example in obedience?
19, 20. (a) Jesus faced what unique challenges regarding obedience to
imperfect humans? (b) Why should true Christians today be obedient to
those taking the lead among them?
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

83

he lived. The Jewish religious system of things, with
its temple in Jerusalem and its priesthood, had long
been approved by Jehovah but was about to be cast
o? and replaced with the Christian congregation arrangement. (Matthew 23:33-38) Meanwhile, many of
the religious leaders were teaching falsehoods derived from Greek philosophy. In the temple, corruption had become so rampant that Jesus called it “a
cave of robbers.” (Mark 11:17) Did Jesus stay away
from that temple and the synagogues? No! Jehovah was still using those arrangements. Until God
stepped in and made changes, Jesus obediently went
to the temple festivals and the synagogue.—Luke 4:
16; John 5:1.
20 If Jesus was obedient under those circumstances, how much more so should true Christians remain
obedient today! After all, we live in far di?erent
times, the long-foretold era of the restoration of pure
worship. God assures us that he will never allow Satan to corrupt his restored people. (Isaiah 2:1, 2; 54:
17) Granted, we encounter sins and imperfections
within the Christian congregation. But should we
use the failings of others as an excuse to disobey Je84

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

hovah, perhaps staying away from Christian meetings or becoming critical of the elders? Never! Rather, we heartily support those taking the lead in the
congregation. Obediently, we attend Christian meetings and assemblies and apply the Scriptural counsel we receive there.—Hebrews 10:24, 25; 13:17.
21

Jesus never allowed people, even well-meaning

friends, to stop him from obeying Jehovah. The
apostle Peter, for instance, tried to persuade his
Master that it was not necessary to su?er and die. Jesus ?rmly rejected Peter’s well-intentioned but misguided counsel that Jesus be kind to himself. (Matthew 16:21-23) Today, Jesus’ followers often cope
with well-meaning relatives who may try to dissuade
them from obeying God’s laws and principles. Like
Jesus’ ?rst-century followers, we hold that “we must
obey God as ruler rather than men.”—Acts 5:29.
22

Rewards of Christlike Obedience
When Jesus faced death, his obedience was put

to the ultimate test. During that dark day, “he
21. How did Jesus respond to pressure from humans to disobey God,
setting what example for us?
22. Jesus gave the answer to what question, and how?
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

85

learned obedience” in the fullest sense. He did his
Father’s will, not his own. (Luke 22:42) In the process, he established a perfect record of integrity.
(1 Timothy 3:16) He became the answer to the longstanding question: Can a perfect human remain obedient to Jehovah even under test? Adam had failed,
and so had Eve. Then Jesus came, lived, died, and
set the record straight. The greatest of all of Jehovah’s creatures gave the strongest possible answer.
He obeyed even when obedience cost him dearly.
23 Integrity, or wholehearted devotion to Jehovah,
is expressed by obedience. Because Jesus obeyed, he
preserved his integrity and bene?ted all mankind.
(Romans 5:19) Jehovah richly rewarded Jesus. If we
obey our Master, Christ, Jehovah will reward us as
well. Obedience to Christ leads to “everlasting salvation”!—Hebrews 5:9.
24 Further, integrity is a reward in itself. Proverbs
10:9 says: “He that is walking in integrity will walk
in security.” If integrity could be likened to a great
mansion made of ?ne bricks, each act of obedience
23-25. (a) How is obedience related to integrity? Illustrate. (b) What
is the subject of the next chapter?
86

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

What are some of Christ’s commands, how may
we obey them, and what blessings will result?
—John 15:8-19.

?

Initially, how did Jesus’ relatives feel about his
ministry, and what may we learn from the way
Jesus handled them?—Mark 3:21, 31-35.

?

Why should we never worry that obeying Jehovah
might deprive us of a happy life?—Luke 11:27, 28.

?

What can we learn from Jesus’ willingness to
obey a law that did not really apply to him?
—Matthew 17:24-27.

might be compared to an individual brick. A brick
may seem insigni?cant, but each one has its place,
its value. And when many are joined together, something of far greater worth is built up. When obedient acts are brought together, one added to the other, day after day and year after year, we build up the
beautiful house of our integrity.
25 A course of obedience that stretches over time
brings to mind another quality—endurance. That aspect of Jesus’ example is the subject of the next
chapter.
“HE LEARNED OBEDIENCE”

87

CHAPTER

7

“Consider Closely the One
Who Has Endured”
THE pressure is intense. Jesus has never before experienced such mental and emotional anguish. He is
in the ?nal hours of his life on earth. Together with
his apostles, he comes to a familiar place, the garden of Gethsemane. He has often met with them
here. On this night, however, he needs some time
alone. Leaving his apostles, he goes deeper into the
garden, and kneeling, he begins to pray. He prays so
earnestly and gets into such an agony that his sweat
becomes “as drops of blood falling to the ground.”
—Luke 22:39-44.
2

Why is Jesus so troubled? True, he knows that

soon he will have to face extreme physical su?ering,
but that is not the reason for his anguish. Far more
important matters weigh on him. He is deeply concerned about his Father’s name and recognizes that
1-3. (a) How severe is Jesus’ agony in the garden of Gethsemane, and
what is the cause? (b) What can be said about Jesus’ example of endurance, and what questions arise?
88

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

the future of the human family depends on his remaining faithful. Jesus knows how vital it is that he
endure. Were he to fail, he would bring great reproach on Jehovah’s name. But Jesus does not fail.
Later that day, moments before drawing his last
breath, the man who set the ?nest example of endurance ever on earth cries out triumphantly: “It has
been accomplished!”—John 19:30.
3

The Bible urges us to “consider closely the one

[Jesus] who has endured.” (Hebrews 12:3) Some important questions thus arise: What are some of the
trials Jesus endured? What enabled him to endure?
How can we follow his example? Before we answer
these questions, though, let us examine what endurance involves.
4

What Is Endurance?
From time to time, all of us are “grieved by var-

ious trials.” (1 Peter 1:6) Does the fact that we undergo a trial necessarily mean that we are enduring
it? No. The Greek noun for “endurance” means “the
4, 5. (a) What does “endurance” mean? (b) How might we illustrate that
endurance involves more than just experiencing inescapable hardship?
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

89

capacity to hold out or bear up in the face of dif?culty.” Regarding the kind of endurance referred to
by Bible writers, one scholar explains: “It is the spirit which can bear things, not simply with resignation, but with blazing hope . . . It is the quality which
keeps a man on his feet with his face to the wind. It
is the virtue which can transmute the hardest trial
into glory because beyond the pain it sees the goal.”
5 To endure, then, is not simply a matter of experiencing inescapable hardship. In the Biblical sense,
endurance involves steadfastness, keeping the right
mental attitude and a hopeful outlook in the face of
trials. Consider an illustration: Two men are imprisoned in similar conditions but for very di?erent reasons. One, a common criminal, begrudgingly serves
his sentence with sad-faced compliance. The other,
a true Christian imprisoned for his faithful course,
stands his ground and keeps a positive attitude because he sees his situation as an opportunity to demonstrate his faith. The criminal can hardly be considered an example of endurance, whereas the loyal
Christian exempli?es this sterling quality.—James 1:
2-4.
90

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

6

Endurance is essential if we are to gain salvation.

(Matthew 24:13) However, we are not born with this
vital quality. Endurance must be cultivated. How?
“Tribulation produces endurance,” says Romans 5:3.
Yes, if we truly want to develop endurance, we cannot fearfully withdraw from all tests of faith. Rather, we must face them. Endurance results when day
by day we confront and overcome trials large and
small. Each test we pass strengthens us to meet the
next one. Of course, we do not build endurance on
our own. We are “dependent on the strength that
God supplies.” (1 Peter 4:11) To help us remain
steadfast, Jehovah has given us the best possible aid
—the example of his Son. Let us take a closer look
at Jesus’ ?awless record of endurance.
7

What Jesus Endured
As the end of his earthly life drew near, Jesus en-

dured cruelty upon cruelty. In addition to the extreme mental stress that he was under on his ?nal
night, consider the disappointment he must have felt
and the humiliation he su?ered. He was betrayed
6. How do we cultivate endurance?
7, 8. What did Jesus endure as the end of his earthly life drew near?
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

91

by an intimate associate, abandoned by his closest
friends, and subjected to an illegal trial during which
members of the highest religious court of the land
ridiculed him, spit on him, and hit him with their
?sts. Yet, he endured it all with quiet dignity and
strength.—Matthew 26:46-49, 56, 59-68.
8

In his ?nal hours, Jesus endured tremendous

physical su?ering. He was scourged, severely beaten
in a way that is said to cause “deep stripelike lacerations and appreciable blood loss.” He was impaled,
executed in a manner that led to “a slow death with
maximum pain and su?ering.” Think about the agony he must have felt as large nails were pounded
through his hands and feet, fastening him to the
stake. (John 19:1, 16-18) Imagine the searing pain
that seized him as the stake was swung upright and
the weight of his body hung from the nails and his
torn back scraped against the stake. And he endured this extreme physical su?ering while bearing
the load described at the outset of this chapter.
9

As followers of Christ, what may we have to en-

9. What is involved in picking up our “torture stake” and following Jesus?
92

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

dure? Jesus said: “If anyone wants to come after me,
let him . . . pick up his torture stake and continually follow me.” (Matthew 16:24) The expression “torture stake” is here used ?guratively to represent suffering, shame, or even death. Following Christ is not
an easy course. Our Christian standards make us different. This world hates us because we are no part
of it. (John 15:18-20; 1 Peter 4:4) Nevertheless, we
are willing to pick up our torture stake—yes, we are
prepared to su?er, even die, rather than give up following our Exemplar.—2 Timothy 3:12.
10

During his ministry, Jesus faced other tests

brought on by the imperfections of those around
him. Recall that he was the “master worker,” whom
Jehovah used to create the earth and all life on it.
(Proverbs 8:22-31) So Jesus knew what Jehovah purposed for humankind; they were to re?ect His qualities and enjoy life in perfect health. (Genesis 1:2628) When on earth, Jesus saw the tragic results of
sin from a di?erent perspective—he himself was a
10-12. (a) Why did the imperfections of those around him pose a test
of endurance for Jesus? (b) What were some of the trialsome situations
that Jesus endured?
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

93

man, able to experience human feelings and emotions. How it must have pained him to see ?rsthand
how far humans had fallen from the original perfection of Adam and Eve! A test of endurance thus confronted Jesus. Would he get discouraged and give up,
viewing sinful humans as a lost cause? Let us see.
11

The unresponsiveness of the Jews caused Jesus

such distress that he openly wept. Did he allow their
indi?erence to dampen his zeal or cause him to stop
preaching? On the contrary, he “went teaching daily
in the temple.” (Luke 19:41-44, 47) He was “thoroughly grieved” at the insensibility of the hearts
of the Pharisees who were watching closely to see
whether he would heal a certain man on the Sabbath. Did he let those self-righteous opposers intimidate him? Certainly not! He stood ?rm and healed
the man—right in the center of the synagogue at
that!—Mark 3:1-5.
12

Something else must have been trialsome for Je-

sus—the weaknesses of his closest disciples. As we
learned in Chapter 3, they demonstrated a persistent
desire for prominence. (Matthew 20:20-24; Luke 9:
94

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

46) Jesus counseled them more than once about the
need for humility. (Matthew 18:1-6; 20:25-28) Yet,
they were slow to respond. Why, on his ?nal night
with them, they got into “a heated dispute” about
who was the greatest among them! (Luke 22:24) Did
Jesus give up on them, reasoning that they were beyond hope? No. Ever patient, he remained positive
and hopeful, continuing to see the good in them. He
knew that at heart they loved Jehovah and really
wanted to do His will.—Luke 22:25-27.
13 We may face tests that are similar to those that
Jesus endured. For example, we may encounter people who are unresponsive or even opposed to the
Kingdom message. Will we allow such negative reactions to dampen our spirits, or will we continue to
preach with zeal? (Titus 2:14) We may be tested as a
result of the imperfections of our Christian brothers. A thoughtless word or careless deed may hurt
our feelings. (Proverbs 12:18) Will we let the shortcomings of fellow believers cause us to give up on
them, or will we continue to put up with their faults
and look for the good in them?—Colossians 3:13.
13. We may face what tests that are similar to those that Jesus endured?
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

95

14

Why Jesus Endured
What helped Jesus to stand ?rm and keep his in-

tegrity despite all the indignities, disappointments,
and su?erings he faced? There are two outstanding
factors that sustained Jesus. First, he looked above,
appealing to “the God who supplies endurance.”
(Romans 15:5) Second, Jesus looked ahead, focusing
on what his endurance would lead to. Let us consider these factors one at a time.
15

Jesus, although the perfect Son of God, did

not rely on his own strength to endure. Instead, he
turned to his heavenly Father and prayed for help
from above. The apostle Paul wrote: “Christ o?ered
up supplications and also petitions to the One who
was able to save him out of death, with strong outcries and tears.” (Hebrews 5:7) Notice that Jesus
“o?ered up” not just petitions but also supplications. The term “supplication” refers to an especially heartfelt and earnest entreaty—yes, a begging for
help. The use of the plural “supplications” indicates
14. What two factors helped Jesus to stand ?rm?
15, 16. (a) What shows that Jesus did not rely on his own strength to
endure? (b) What con?dence did Jesus have in his Father, and why?
96

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

that Jesus implored Jehovah more than once. Indeed, in the garden of Gethsemane, Jesus prayed repeatedly and fervently.—Matthew 26:36-44.
16

Jesus had complete con?dence that Jehovah

would answer his supplications, for he knew that his
Father is the “Hearer of prayer.” (Psalm 65:2) During his prehuman existence, the ?rstborn Son had
seen how his Father responds to the prayers of loyal worshippers. For example, the Son was an eyewitness in the heavens when Jehovah dispatched an angel to answer the heartfelt prayer of the prophet
Daniel—even before Daniel had ?nished praying.
(Daniel 9:20, 21) How, then, could the Father fail to
answer when his only-begotten Son poured out his
heart “with strong outcries and tears”? Jehovah did
respond to the entreaties of his Son and sent an angel to strengthen him to bear up under the ordeal.
—Luke 22:43.
17

To endure, we too must look heavenward—to

the God “who imparts power.” (Philippians 4:13) If
the perfect Son of God felt the need to supplicate
17. To endure, why should we look heavenward, and how may we do so?
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

97

Jehovah for help, how much more so should we! Like
Jesus, we may need to implore Jehovah repeatedly.
(Matthew 7:7) Although we do not expect to receive
an angelic visit, of this we can be sure: Our loving
God will respond to the pleas of the loyal Christian
who “persists in supplications and prayers night and
day.” (1 Timothy 5:5) Regardless of the trials we
may face—whether ill health, the death of a loved
one, or persecution from opposers—Jehovah will answer our fervent prayers for wisdom, courage, and
strength to endure.—2 Corinthians 4:7-11; James 1:5.
18

The second factor that enabled Jesus to endure

is that he looked ahead, beyond the su?ering to what
lay before him. Of Jesus, the Bible says: “For the joy
that was set before him he endured a torture stake.”
(Hebrews 12:2) Jesus’ example illustrates how hope,
joy, and endurance work together. This might be
summed up as follows: Hope leads to joy, and joy to
endurance. (Romans 15:13; Colossians 1:11) Jesus
had marvelous prospects. He knew that faithfulness
on his part would help to vindicate his Father’s sov18. How did Jesus look beyond his su?ering to what lay ahead?
98

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ereignty and enable him to repurchase the human
family from sin and death. Jesus also had the hope
of ruling as King and serving as High Priest, to bring
further blessings to obedient humans. (Matthew 20:
28; Hebrews 7:23-26) By focusing on the prospects
and hope before him, Jesus found immeasurable joy,
and that joy, in turn, helped him to endure.
19

Like Jesus, we need to let hope, joy, and endur-

ance work together in our behalf. “Rejoice in the
hope,” said the apostle Paul. He then added: “Endure under tribulation.” (Romans 12:12) Are you facing a severe test of faith at the present time? Then
by all means look ahead. Do not lose sight of the way
your endurance will bring praise to Jehovah’s name.
Keep the precious Kingdom hope in clear focus. Picture yourself in God’s coming new world, and imagine yourself experiencing the blessings of the Paradise. Anticipating the ful?llment of the wonderful
things Jehovah has promised—including the vindication of his sovereignty, the removal of wickedness
from the earth, and the elimination of sickness and
19. When faced with tests of faith, how can we let hope, joy, and endurance work together in our behalf?
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

99

death—will ?ll your heart with joy, and that joy can
help you to endure no matter what trials may befall
you. When compared with the realization of the
Kingdom hope, any su?ering in this system of things
is indeed “momentary and light.”—2 Corinthians
4:17.
20

“Follow His Steps Closely”
Jesus knew that being his follower would be

challenging, a course calling for endurance. (John
15:20) He was prepared to lead the way, knowing
that his example would strengthen others. (John 16:
33) Granted, Jesus set the perfect example of endurance, but we are far from perfect. What does Jehovah expect of us? Peter explains: “Christ su?ered for
you, leaving you a model for you to follow his steps
closely.” (1 Peter 2:21) In the way he dealt with
trials, Jesus left “a model,” a pattern to be copied.1
The record of endurance that he built up may be
1 The Greek word translated “model” literally means “underwriting.” The apostle Peter is the only writer of the Christian Greek
Scriptures to use this word, which is said to mean “ ‘a copyhead’ in
a child’s exercise book, a perfect piece of writing which the child is
to imitate as exactly as it can.”

20, 21. When it comes to endurance, what does Jehovah expect of us,
and what should be our determination?
100

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

How might we regard any su?ering we may
experience because of being a follower of Christ?
—Matthew 5:10-12.

?

What did Jesus tell his followers to expect,
and how can we follow the counsel he gave?
—Matthew 10:16-22.

?

When facing opposition or persecution, how can
we follow Jesus’ example?—1 Peter 2:18-25.

?

What does faithful endurance under su?ering
con?rm?—1 Peter 4:12-14.

compared to “steps,” or footprints. We cannot follow those steps perfectly, but we can follow them
“closely.”
21

Let us, then, be determined to follow Jesus’ ex-

ample to the best of our ability. Let us never forget
that the more closely we follow in Jesus’ footsteps,
the better equipped we will be to endure “to the end”
—the end of this old system of things or the end of
our present life. We do not know which will come
?rst, but we do know this: For all eternity, Jehovah
will reward us for our endurance.—Matthew 24:13.
“CONSIDER CLOSELY THE ONE WHO HAS ENDURED”

101

S E C T I O N

2

“T E AC H I N G . . .
AND PREACHING THE
G O OD NEWS”
Carpenter. Miracle worker. Healer.
Jesus was all of these and more. Yet, people
did not use such terms when addressing him.
They called him Teacher. Indeed, his lifework
was “teaching . . . and preaching the good news.”
(Matthew 4:23) As followers of Jesus,
we have the same work to do. In this section,
we will study his example, which
shows us the way.

102

CHAPTER

8

“For This I Was Sent Forth”
THEY have been walking for hours. Jesus and his
apostles are trekking northward, heading from Judea
toward Galilee. The shortest route—a journey of
about three days—takes them through Samaria. As
the sun nears its zenith, they approach a small city
named Sychar, where they stop for refreshment.
2 While his apostles go to buy food, Jesus rests by
a well outside the city. A woman approaches to draw
water. Jesus could choose to ignore her. He is “tired
out from the journey.” (John 4:6) It would be understandable if he just closed his eyes and let this Samaritan woman come and go unnoticed. As we saw
in Chapter 4 of this book, the woman would likely
expect any Jew to treat her with disdain. Yet, Jesus
strikes up a conversation with her.
3 He opens with an illustration, one taken from the
woman’s daily life—indeed, from this very moment.
She is here to draw water; Jesus speaks of life-giving
water that will quench her spiritual thirst. Several
1-4. (a) How does Jesus skillfully teach a Samaritan woman, and with
what result? (b) How do his apostles react?
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

103

times, she raises points that are potentially controversial.1 Jesus tactfully sidesteps such issues and
keeps the conversation on track. He focuses on spiritual matters—pure worship and Jehovah God. His
words have far-reaching e?ects, for the woman relays
them to the men of the city, and they too want to listen to Jesus.—John 4:3-42.
4

Upon their return, how do the apostles feel about

the remarkable witness that Jesus is giving here?
There is no sign of enthusiasm on their part. They
are surprised that Jesus is even talking to this woman, and evidently they say nothing to her. After she
leaves, they keep urging Jesus to eat the food they
have brought. However, Jesus says to them: “I have
food to eat of which you do not know.” Puzzled, they
take his words literally at ?rst. Then he explains:
“My food is for me to do the will of him that sent
me and to ?nish his work.” (John 4:32, 34) Jesus thus
teaches them that his main work in life is more im1 For example, in asking why a Jew addresses a Samaritan, she
brings up the subject of the centuries-old feud between the two peoples. (John 4:9) She also asserts that her people descended from
Jacob, a claim that the Jews of the day vehemently deny. (John 4:12)
They call Samaritans by the name Cuthaeans to emphasize their descent from foreign peoples.
104

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

portant to him than eating. He wants them to feel
the same way about it. What is this work?
5 Jesus once said: “I must declare the good news of
the kingdom of God, because for this I was sent
forth.” (Luke 4:43) Yes, Jesus was sent to preach and
to teach the good news of God’s Kingdom.1 Jesus’
followers today have the same work to do. It is vital,
then, that we consider why Jesus preached, what he
preached, and what his attitude toward his assignment was.
Why Jesus Preached
6 Let us consider how Jesus felt about the truths
he taught; then we will discuss his attitude toward
the people he taught. Jesus used a vivid illustration
to show how he felt about sharing with others the
truths Jehovah had taught him. He said: “Every
public instructor, when taught respecting the kingdom of the heavens, is like a man, a householder,
1 To preach means to proclaim, or declare, a message. To teach is
similar in meaning but involves conveying a message in greater depth
and detail. Good teaching includes ?nding ways to reach hearts in
order to motivate students to act on what they hear.

5. What was Jesus’ lifework, and what will we consider in this chapter?
6, 7. How did Jesus want “every public instructor” to feel about sharing the good news with others? Illustrate.
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

105

who brings out of his treasure store things new and
old.” (Matthew 13:52) Why does the householder
in this illustration bring things out of his treasure
store?
7 The householder is not simply showing o? his
possessions, the way King Hezekiah of old once
did—with painful consequences. (2 Kings 20:13-20)
What does motivate the householder? Consider an illustration: You visit a favorite teacher in his home.
He opens a desk drawer and pulls out a couple of
letters—one of them yellowed with age, the other
newer. They are letters that he received from his father—one of them decades ago when the teacher was
but a boy, the other in recent times. His eyes gleam
with pleasure as he tells you how much he values
these letters and how the advice they contain has
changed his life and could help you. The letters are
clearly treasured by the teacher, holding a cherished
place in his heart. (Luke 6:45) He shares them with
you, not to boast or to pro?t in some way, but to bene?t you and to convey to you a sense of their worth.
8 The Great Teacher, Jesus, had similar motives
8. Why do we have good reason to feel that the truths we learn from
God’s Word are treasures?
106

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

in sharing God’s truths with others. To him, those
truths were treasures beyond price. He loved them,
and he was eager to share them. He wanted all his
followers, “every public instructor,” to feel that way.
Do we? We have ample reason to love every truth
we learn from God’s Word. We treasure gems of
truth whether they are long-cherished beliefs or recent re?nements. By speaking with heartfelt enthusiasm and maintaining our love for what Jehovah
has taught us, we convey that love, as Jesus did.
9

Jesus also loved the people he taught, as we will

discuss more fully in Section 3. Prophecy foretold
that the Messiah would “feel sorry for the lowly one
and the poor one.” (Psalm 72:13) Indeed, Jesus cared
about people. He cared about the thoughts and attitudes that drove them; he was concerned about the
burdens that weighed them down and the obstacles
that hindered them from grasping the truth. (Matthew 11:28; 16:13; 23:13, 15) Recall the Samaritan
woman, for example. No doubt she was greatly impressed that Jesus took an interest in her. His insight
9. (a) How did Jesus feel about the people he taught? (b) How can we
imitate Jesus’ attitude toward people?
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

107

into her personal situation moved her to accept him
as a prophet and to tell others about him. (John 4:
16-19, 39) Granted, Jesus’ followers today cannot
read the hearts of the people to whom they preach.
However, we can take an interest in people, as Jesus
did; we can let our concern for them show; and we
can tailor our words to meet their particular interests, challenges, and needs.
10

What Jesus Preached
What did Jesus preach? If you were to seek the

answer by examining the teachings of many churches that claim to represent him, you might conclude
that he proclaimed some kind of social gospel. Or
perhaps you would get the impression that he advocated political reform or that he stressed personal
salvation above all else. However, as previously noted, Jesus said plainly: “I must declare the good news
of the kingdom of God.” Just what did that involve?
11

Remember, Jesus was present in heaven when

Satan ?rst challenged the rightness of Jehovah’s sovereignty. How it must have pained Jesus to see his
10, 11. (a) What did Jesus preach? (b) How did the need for God’s
Kingdom arise?
108

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

righteous Father slandered and accused of being an
unjust Ruler who withholds good from His creatures! How hurt God’s Son must have been when
Adam and Eve, the future parents of humankind,
gave heed to Satan’s slander! The Son saw that the
human family was infected with sin and death as a
result of that rebellion. (Romans 5:12) How thrilled
he must have been, though, to learn that his Father
would one day set matters straight!
12

Above all else, what needed to be set straight?

Jehovah’s holy name needed to be sancti?ed, cleared
of every trace of reproach heaped upon it by Satan
and all who have sided with him. The rightfulness of
Jehovah’s sovereignty, his way of ruling, needed to
be vindicated. Better than any other man, Jesus understood these vital issues. In the model prayer, he
taught his followers to ask ?rst for his Father’s name
to be sancti?ed, next for his Father’s Kingdom to
come, and then for God’s will to be done on earth.
(Matthew 6:9, 10) God’s Kingdom, with Christ Jesus as its Ruler, will soon rid the earth of Satan’s
12, 13. God’s Kingdom will set straight what injustices, and how did
Jesus make the Kingdom central to his ministry?
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

109

corrupt system and con?rm Jehovah’s righteous rulership for all time.—Daniel 2:44.
13

That Kingdom was the theme of Jesus’ ministry.

All his words and all his actions helped to clarify
what that Kingdom is and how it will serve Jehovah’s purpose. Jesus allowed nothing to sidetrack
him from his mission to preach the good news of
God’s Kingdom. In his day, there were pressing social issues, countless injustices, yet his focus was on
his message and his work. Did maintaining such a focus mean that Jesus was narrow in his outlook, dull
and repetitive in his approach? Far from it!
14

As we will see throughout this section, Jesus

made his teaching both interesting and colorful. He
appealed to people’s hearts. We might be reminded
of wise King Solomon, who sought delightful words,
correct words of truth, to convey the thoughts that
Jehovah inspired him to write down. (Ecclesiastes
12:10) Jehovah gave that imperfect man “broadness
of heart,” enabling him to speak about many things,
from birds to ?sh to trees to beasts. People came
14, 15. (a) How did Jesus prove to be “something more than Solomon”? (b) How can we imitate Jesus in what we preach?
110

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

from far away to hear Solomon speak. (1 Kings 4:2934) Yet, Jesus was “something more than Solomon.”
(Matthew 12:42) He was far wiser, with far more
“broadness of heart.” When teaching people, Jesus
drew on his superior knowledge of God’s Word as
well as of birds, animals, ?sh, agriculture, weather,
current events, history, and social conditions. At the
same time, Jesus never showed o? his knowledge in
order to impress others. He kept his message simple
and clear. No wonder people delighted to hear him
speak!—Mark 12:37; Luke 19:48.
15 Christians today try to follow Jesus’ lead. We do
not have his immense wisdom and knowledge, but all
of us do have a measure of knowledge and experience from which to draw when we share with others
the truths of God’s Word. Parents, for instance, may
draw from their experience in raising children to illustrate Jehovah’s love for His children. Others may
draw examples or illustrations from secular work,
school, or their knowledge of people and current
events. At the same time, we are careful not to let
anything divert attention from our message—the
good news of God’s Kingdom.—1 Timothy 4:16.
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

111

Jesus’ Attitude Toward His Ministry
16 Jesus felt that his ministry was a precious treasure. He delighted in helping people to see his heavenly Father as He truly is, unobscured by confusing man-made doctrines and traditions. Jesus loved
helping people gain an approved relationship with
Jehovah and the hope of everlasting life. He delighted in bringing people the comfort and joy of the
good news. How did he show that he had such feelings? Consider three ways.
17 First, Jesus made the ministry the primary focus of
his life. Talking about the Kingdom was his career,
his lifework, his central interest. That is why, as we
noted in Chapter 5, Jesus wisely kept his life simple.
As he counseled others, he kept his eye focused on
what mattered most. He was not distracted by a lot
of things that he would have to pay for, maintain,
and repair or replace as time went on. He lived simply so that nothing would needlessly pull him away
from his ministry.—Matthew 6:22; 8:20.
18 Second, Jesus expended himself in his ministry. He
16, 17. (a) What attitude did Jesus have toward his ministry? (b) How
did Jesus show that his ministry was the focus of his life?
18. In what ways did Jesus expend himself in his ministry?
112

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

devoted immense energy to it, walking literally hundreds of miles throughout Palestine, seeking out
people with whom he might share the good news. He
spoke to them in their homes, in public squares, in
marketplaces, and out in the open. He spoke to them
even when he was in need of rest, food, water, or a
little quiet time with his closest friends. Even as he
was dying, he continued to share with others the
good news of God’s Kingdom!—Luke 23:39-43.
19 Third, Jesus treated the ministry as something urgent. Remember his conversation with the Samaritan
woman at the well outside of Sychar. Jesus’ apostles
apparently did not see in that situation an urgent
need to share the good news with others. Jesus said
to them: “Do you not say that there are yet four
months before the harvest comes? Look! I say to you:
Lift up your eyes and view the ?elds, that they are
white for harvesting.”—John 4:35.
20 Jesus drew that illustration from the season at
hand. It was evidently the month of Chislev (November/December). The barley harvest would not come
for another four months, about the time of Passover,
19, 20. How did Jesus illustrate the urgency of the preaching work?
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

113

on Nisan 14. So farmers did not feel any urgency
about the harvest just then. It was still a long way
o?. But what about the harvest of people? Ah, many
were ready to hear, to learn, to become Christ’s disciples and gain the marvelous hope that Jehovah
held out to them. It was as if Jesus could look out
over those ?gurative ?elds and see that they were
white with all the ripe grain swaying gently in the
breeze, signaling their readiness to be harvested.1
The time was at hand, and the work was urgent! Consequently, when people of one city tried to keep Jesus with them, he replied: “Also to other cities I
must declare the good news of the kingdom of God,
because for this I was sent forth.”—Luke 4:43.
21 In all three ways just discussed, we can imitate
Jesus. We can make the Christian ministry the primary focus of our life. Even though we may have
family and secular obligations, we can show that our
ministry comes ?rst by having a zealous, regular
share in it, as Jesus did. (Matthew 6:33; 1 Timothy
5:8) We can expend ourselves in the ministry, giving
1 Regarding this verse, one reference work notes: “Grain, when ripe,
turns from a green to a yellow, or light colour, indicating that it is
time to reap it.”

21. How can we imitate Jesus?
114

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

How might our prayers and our actions show
that we grasp the urgency of the ministry?
—Matthew 9:35-38.

?

If we ?nd that our zeal for the ministry is
cooling o?, how might Jesus’ attitude spur us on?
—Mark 1:35-39.

?

As we preach, how should we view people who
are lowly, oppressed, or rejected by others?
—Luke 18:35–19:10.

?

Why should we never let a mixed or hostile
response to our preaching dampen our zeal?
—John 7:32-52.

generously of our time, energy, and resources to support it. (Luke 13:24) And we can keep ever in mind
that our work is urgent. (2 Timothy 4:2) We need to
seize every opportunity to preach!
22 Jesus also showed that he saw the importance of
the work by ensuring that it would continue after his
death. He commissioned his followers to carry on
the preaching and teaching work. That commission
will be the subject of the following chapter.
22. What will be considered in the following chapter?
“FOR THIS I WAS SENT FORTH”

115

CHAPTER

9

“Go . . . and Make Disciples”
A FARMER faces a real challenge. Some months
earlier, he plowed his ?elds and sowed seeds. He
watched with great care as the ?rst blades appeared,
and he rejoiced as the plants matured. Now all his
hard work is rewarded, for the time to reap has arrived. His dilemma is this: The crop is too abundant
for him to gather it alone. To meet this challenge, he
wisely decides to hire some workers and send them
out into his ?elds. After all, there is only so much
time to gather his precious crop.
2 In the spring of 33 C.E., the resurrected Jesus
faces a similar challenge. During his earthly ministry, he sowed seeds of truth. Now there is a harvest
to reap, and the crop is abundant. Many responsive
ones need to be gathered as disciples. (John 4:35-38)
How does Jesus meet this challenge? On a mountain
in Galilee, shortly before ascending to heaven, he
gives his disciples a commission to ?nd more work1-3. (a) What does a farmer do when the crop is too abundant for him
to gather it alone? (b) What challenge does Jesus face in the spring of
33 C.E., and how does he meet it?
116

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ers, saying: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them . . . , teaching
them to observe all the things I have commanded
you.”—Matthew 28:19, 20.
3

That commission lies at the very heart of what it

means to be a genuine follower of Christ. Let us,
then, examine three questions. Why did Jesus issue
the commission for more workers? How did he train
his disciples to ?nd them? How are we involved in
this commission?
4

Why More Workers Were Needed
When Jesus began his ministry in 29 C.E., he

knew that he was starting a work that he would not
?nish on his own. In the short time he had left on
earth, there was a limit to the area he could cover
and the number of people he could reach with the
Kingdom message. True, he con?ned his preaching
mainly to Jews and proselytes, “the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.” (Matthew 15:24) However, those
“lost sheep” were scattered throughout the length
and breadth of Israel, a land covering thousands of
4, 5. Why would Jesus not ?nish the work that he had started, and who
would have to carry on the work after he returned to heaven?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

117

square miles. Besides, the rest of the world ?eld
would eventually have to be reached with the good
news.—Matthew 13:38; 24:14.
5

Jesus recognized that much work would remain

to be done after his death. To his 11 faithful apostles, he said: “Most truly I say to you, He that exercises faith in me, that one also will do the works that
I do; and he will do works greater than these, because I am going my way to the Father.” (John 14:
12) Since the Son was returning to heaven, his followers—not just the apostles but also all future
disciples—would have to carry on the preaching and
teaching work. (John 17:20) Jesus humbly acknowledged that their works would be “greater than” his.
How so? In three ways.
6

First, Jesus’ followers would cover more territory.

Today their witnessing has reached the extremities
of the earth, far beyond the borders of the land
where Jesus himself preached. Second, they would
reach more people. The small band of disciples Jesus
6, 7. (a) In what ways would the works done by Jesus’ followers be
greater than his? (b) How can we show that Jesus’ con?dence in his followers was not misplaced?
118

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

left behind quickly grew into the thousands. (Acts 2:
41; 4:4) Now they number into the millions, and
hundreds of thousands of new ones are being baptized each year. Third, they would preach for a longer period of time—right down to this day, almost
2,000 years after Jesus’ ministry of three and a half
years ended.
7

Jesus was expressing con?dence in his followers

when he said that they would do “works greater than
these.” He was placing in their hands a work that was
of utmost importance to him, that of preaching and
teaching “the good news of the kingdom of God.”
(Luke 4:43) He was convinced that they would faithfully carry out the assignment. What does this mean
for us today? When we zealously and wholeheartedly pursue the ministry, we show that Jesus’ con?dence in his followers was not misplaced. Is this not
a remarkable privilege?—Luke 13:24.
8

Trained to Give a Witness
Jesus gave his disciples the best possible training

for the ministry. Above all, he set a perfect example
8, 9. What example did Jesus set in the ministry, and how can we pattern our ministry after his example?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

119

for them. (Luke 6:40) In the preceding chapter, we
discussed his attitude toward the ministry. Consider, for a moment, the disciples who traveled with Jesus on his preaching tours. They observed that he
preached wherever people could be found—on lakeshores and hillsides, in cities and marketplaces, and
in private homes. (Matthew 5:1, 2; Luke 5:1-3; 8:1; 19:
5, 6) They saw that he was a hard worker, rising early and serving well into the night. The ministry was
no casual pastime for him! (Luke 21:37, 38; John 5:
17) They no doubt sensed that he was motivated by
deep-rooted love for people. Perhaps they saw in his
face a re?ection of the compassion he felt in his
heart. (Mark 6:34) What e?ect do you think Jesus’
example had on his disciples? How would you have
been a?ected?
9 As followers of Christ, we pattern our ministry
after his example. Hence, we leave no stone unturned when it comes to giving “a thorough witness.” (Acts 10:42) Like Jesus, we call on people in
their homes. (Acts 5:42) We adjust our schedule, if
necessary, so that we can call at a time when they
are more likely to be at home. We also search out
120

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

and discreetly preach to people in public places—on
streets, in parks, in stores, and in the workplace. We
keep “working hard and exerting ourselves” in the
ministry, for we take this work seriously. (1 Timothy
4:10) Deep, heartfelt love for others motivates us to
keep looking for opportunities to preach wherever
and whenever people can be found.—1 Thessalonians 2:8.
10

Another way that Jesus trained his disciples was

by providing them with extensive instruction. Before
sending out ?rst the 12 apostles and later the 70 disciples to preach, Jesus held what amounted to training sessions. (Matthew 10:1-15; Luke 10:1-12) The
training produced good results, for Luke 10:17 reports: “The seventy returned with joy.” Let us consider two of the important lessons Jesus taught,
keeping in mind that his words are to be understood
against the background of Jewish customs in Bible
times.
11

Jesus taught his disciples to trust in Jehovah. He

told them: “Do not procure gold or silver or copper
10-12. What important lessons did Jesus teach his disciples before sending them out to preach?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

121

for your girdle purses, or a food pouch for the trip,
or two undergarments, or sandals or a sta?; for the
worker deserves his food.” (Matthew 10:9, 10) It was
common for travelers to take along a girdle purse for
money, a food pouch for provisions, and an extra
pair of sandals.1 By instructing his disciples not to
worry about such things, Jesus was, in e?ect, saying:
“Place your trust entirely in Jehovah, for he will take
care of your needs.” Jehovah would provide for them
by moving those who accepted the good news to
extend hospitality, which was a custom in Israel.
—Luke 22:35.
12 Jesus also taught his disciples to avoid unnecessary distractions. He said: “Do not embrace anybody
in greeting along the road.” (Luke 10:4) Was Jesus
telling them to be cool or aloof? Not at all. In Bible times, greetings often involved much more than
a simple hello. Customary greetings included various formalities and lengthy conversation. One Bible
scholar states: “Salutations among the Orientals did
not consist, as among us, of a slight bow, or exten1 A girdle purse was perhaps a type of money belt used to carry
coins. A food pouch was a larger bag, usually of leather, slung over
the shoulder and used for carrying food or other provisions.
122

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

sion of the hand, but [were] performed by many embraces, and inclinations, and even prostrations of the
body on the ground. All this required much time.”
By telling his disciples not to engage in the customary greetings, Jesus was, in a sense, saying: “You
must make the most of your time, for the message
you bear is urgent.”1
13

We take to heart the instructions that Jesus

gave his ?rst-century disciples. In carrying out our
ministry, we place our complete trust in Jehovah.
(Proverbs 3:5, 6) We know that we will never lack
the necessities of life if we “keep . . . seeking ?rst
the kingdom.” (Matthew 6:33) Full-time Kingdom
preachers the world over can testify that even during di?cult times, Jehovah’s hand is never short.
(Psalm 37:25) We also recognize the need to avoid
distractions. If we are not careful, this system of
things can easily sidetrack us. (Luke 21:34-36) This,
1 The prophet Elisha once gave similar instructions. When sending
his servant Gehazi to the home of a woman whose son had died, Elisha said: “In case you encounter anyone, you must not greet him.”
(2 Kings 4:29) The mission was urgent, so there was no time for needless delay.

13. In what ways can we demonstrate that we take to heart the instructions that Jesus gave his ?rst-century disciples?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

123

however, is no time to be distracted. With lives
at stake, our message is urgent. (Romans 10:13-15)
Keeping a sense of urgency alive in our hearts will
prevent us from allowing the distractions of this
world to consume time and energy that would be
better spent in the ministry. Remember, the time left
is short and the harvest is great.—Matthew 9:37, 38.
14

A Commission That Involves Us
With the words “Go . . . and make disciples,” the

resurrected Jesus placed a heavy responsibility upon
his followers. He had in mind more than just the disciples who were present that spring day on the mountain in Galilee.1 The work he commissioned involves
reaching “people of all the nations,” and it continues “until the conclusion of the system of things.”
Clearly, this commission applies to all followers of
Christ, including us today. Let us take a closer look
at Jesus’ words recorded at Matthew 28:18-20.
1 Since most of his followers were in Galilee, it may have been on
the occasion described at Matthew 28:16-20 that the resurrected Jesus appeared to “upward of ?ve hundred.” (1 Corinthians 15:6) So
hundreds may have been present when Jesus gave the commission to
make disciples.

14. What indicates that the commission recorded at Matthew 28:18-20
applies to all followers of Christ? (See also footnote.)
124

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

15

Before giving the commission, Jesus says: “All

authority has been given me in heaven and on the
earth.” (Verse 18) Does Jesus really have such vast
authority? Yes, indeed! He is the archangel, commanding myriads of myriads of angels. (1 Thessalonians 4:16; Revelation 12:7) As “head of the congregation,” he has authority over his followers on earth.
(Ephesians 5:23) Since 1914, he has been ruling as
Messianic King in heaven. (Revelation 11:15) His
authority reaches even into the grave, for he has
the power to resurrect the dead. (John 5:26-28) By
?rst declaring his extensive authority, Jesus indicates that the words that follow are not a suggestion
but a command. We are wise to obey, for his authority is not self-assumed but divinely bestowed.—1 Corinthians 15:27.
16

Jesus now outlines the commission, which be-

gins with a single word: “Go.” (Verse 19) He thus calls
upon us to take the initiative to reach others with
the Kingdom message. In ful?lling this aspect of the
15. Why are we wise to obey Jesus’ command to make disciples?
16. By telling us to “go,” what is Jesus calling upon us to do, and how
do we ful?ll this aspect of the commission?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

125

commission, there is room for a variety of methods.
Preaching from house to house is a most e?ective
way to make personal contact with people. (Acts 20:
20) We also look for opportunities to witness informally; we are eager to initiate a conversation about
the good news wherever appropriate in the course of
our daily life. Our speci?c methods of preaching may
vary, being adapted to local needs and circumstances. One thing, though, remains the same: We “go”
and search for deserving ones.—Matthew 10:11.
17

Jesus next explains the objective of the commis-

sion, namely, to “make disciples of people of all the
nations.” (Verse 19) How do we “make disciples”?
Basically, a disciple is a learner, a taught one. Making disciples, however, is not merely a matter of imparting knowledge to others. When we study the Bible with interested ones, our goal is to help them to
become followers of Christ. Whenever possible, we
highlight Jesus’ example so that our students learn
to look to him as their Teacher and Model, living the
way he lived and doing the work he did.—John 13:15.
17. How do we “make disciples”?
126

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

18

A vital part of the commission is expressed in

the words: “Baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the holy spirit.” (Verse 19)
Baptism is the most important milestone in a disciple’s life, for it is a ?tting symbol of his wholehearted dedication to God. Thus, it is essential for salvation. (1 Peter 3:21) Yes, by continuing to do his best
in serving Jehovah, the baptized disciple can look
forward to endless blessings in the new world to
come. Have you helped someone to become a baptized disciple of Christ? In the Christian ministry,
there is no greater cause for joy.—3 John 4.
19

Jesus explains the next part of the commission,

saying: “Teaching them to observe all the things I
have commanded you.” (Verse 20) We teach new
ones to heed Jesus’ commands, including the commands to love God, to love neighbor, and to be disciple makers. (Matthew 22:37-39) We progressively
teach them to explain Bible truths and defend their
growing faith. When they qualify to participate in
18. Why is baptism the most important milestone in a disciple’s life?
19. What do we teach new ones, and why might the teaching continue after their baptism?
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

127

the public preaching activity, we work along with
them, teaching them by word and example how to
have a meaningful share in this work. The teaching
of new disciples is not necessarily ?nished prior to
their baptism. Newly baptized ones may need additional instruction to help them meet the challenges
involved in following Christ.—Luke 9:23, 24.
20

“I Am With You All the Days”
The ?nal words of Jesus’ commission are most

reassuring: “Look! I am with you all the days until
the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matthew
28:20) Jesus recognizes that this assignment is a
weighty one. He also knows that ful?lling it will
at times provoke hostile reactions from opposers.
(Luke 21:12) There is, however, no reason to fear.
Our Leader does not expect us to carry out this assignment unaided or alone. Is it not comforting to
know that the One who has “all authority . . . in heaven and on the earth” is with us to support us in ful?lling this commission?
20, 21. (a) In carrying out Jesus’ commission, why do we have no reason to fear? (b) Why is this no time to slow down, and what should be
our determination?
128

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

In what manner should we approach others
with the Kingdom message?—Matthew 10:11-13;
Luke 10:5.

?

When our preaching work is opposed, how can
Jesus’ words help us to cope?—Mark 13:9-13.

?

How are we to deal with those who are
unresponsive to our message?—Luke 10:10, 11.

?

When we give priority to the preaching work,
what con?dence can we have?—Luke 12:22-31.
21

Jesus assured his disciples that he would be

with them in their ministry throughout the centuries to “the conclusion of the system of things.” Until the end comes, we must continue to carry out Jesus’ commission. Now is no time to slow down. An
abundant spiritual harvest is in progress! Responsive ones are being gathered in great numbers. As
followers of Christ, let us be determined to ful?ll the
weighty commission that has been entrusted to us.
Let us be resolved to give of our time, energy, and
resources to carry out Christ’s command: “Go . . .
and make disciples.”
“GO . . . AND MAKE DISCIPLES”

129

CHAPTER

10

“It Is Written”
IT IS early in Jesus’ ministry. Christ has returned to
Nazareth, his hometown. His goal is to help the people draw a vital conclusion: He is the long-foretold
Messiah! What evidence does he present?
2

Many would no doubt expect a miracle. They

have heard reports of the amazing works Jesus has
performed. He gives them no such sign, however.
Rather, he goes to the synagogue, as is his custom.
He stands up to read, and the scroll of Isaiah is handed to him. It is a long scroll, likely wound around a
pair of rods, and Jesus carefully winds the document
from one rod to the other until he ?nds the passage
he seeks. Then he reads aloud what is now Isaiah 61:
1-3.—Luke 4:16-19.
3

The audience surely knows the passage. It is a

prophecy about the Messiah. Every eye in the synagogue is ?xed on Jesus. Silence hangs in the air.
Then Jesus begins to explain, perhaps at length: “To1-3. What vital conclusion does Jesus want the people of Nazareth to
draw, and what evidence does he present?
130

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

day this scripture that you just heard is ful?lled.”
The audience marvels at his winsome words, but
many evidently still want to see some spectacular
sign. Instead, Jesus boldly uses a Scriptural example
to expose their lack of faith. Soon, the people of
Nazareth try to kill him!—Luke 4:20-30.
4 Jesus here set a pattern that he maintained
throughout his ministry. He relied heavily on the inspired Word of God. True, his miracles were of great
importance in demonstrating that God’s spirit was
with him. Yet, nothing carried more weight with Jesus than the Holy Scriptures. Let us examine the example he set in this regard. We will consider how our
Master quoted from God’s Word, defended God’s
Word, and explained God’s Word.
Quoting From God’s Word
5 Jesus wanted people to know where his message
came from. He said: “What I teach is not mine, but
belongs to him that sent me.” (John 7:16) On another occasion, he said: “I do nothing of my own
4. Jesus set what pattern in his ministry, and what will we consider in
this chapter?
5. What was Jesus determined to convey to his listeners, and how did
he demonstrate the truth of his words?
“IT IS WRITTEN”

131

initiative; but just as the Father taught me I speak
these things.” (John 8:28) Further, he said: “The
things I say to you men I do not speak of my own
originality; but the Father who remains in union
with me is doing his works.” (John 14:10) One way
that Jesus proved the truth of such comments was
by quoting God’s written Word again and again.
6

A close study of Jesus’ recorded words reveals

that he quoted directly from or referred indirectly
to over half of the books of the Hebrew Scripture
canon. At ?rst, that may not sound impressive. You
may wonder why, in three and a half years of public
teaching and preaching, he did not quote from all
the inspired books available. In truth, though, he
may well have done so. Remember, only a fraction
of Jesus’ words and deeds are recorded. (John 21:25)
In fact, you could probably read aloud all of Jesus’
recorded words in just a few hours. Now, imagine
talking about God and his Kingdom for just a few
hours and managing to work in references to over
6, 7. (a) How extensively did Jesus quote from the Hebrew Scriptures,
and why is this impressive? (b) How did Jesus’ teaching di?er from that
of the scribes?
132

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

half of the books of the Hebrew Scriptures! Furthermore, in most cases Jesus did not have written
scrolls at hand. When he delivered his famous Sermon on the Mount, he included dozens of direct and
indirect references to the Hebrew Scriptures—all
from memory!
7

Jesus’ quotations showed his profound reverence

for the Word of God. His audience “became astounded at his way of teaching, for there he was teaching them as one having authority, and not as the
scribes.” (Mark 1:22) When the scribes taught, they
were fond of referring to the so-called oral law, quoting learned rabbis from times past. Jesus never once
cited the oral law or some rabbi as an authority.
Rather, he viewed God’s Word as the ?nal authority. Again and again, we ?nd him saying: “It is written.” He repeatedly used those or similar words in
teaching his followers and in correcting wrong ideas.
8

When Jesus cleansed the temple in Jerusalem, he

said: “It is written, ‘My house will be called a house
8, 9. (a) How did Jesus uphold the authority of God’s Word when he
cleansed the temple? (b) In what way did the religious leaders at the temple show gross disrespect for God’s Word?
“IT IS WRITTEN”

133

of prayer,’ but you are making it a cave of robbers.” (Matthew 21:12, 13; Isaiah 56:7; Jeremiah 7:
11) The day before, he had performed many marvelous works there. Young boys, deeply impressed,
began praising him. However, the religious leaders
indignantly asked Jesus if he heard what those children were saying. He answered: “Yes. Did you never
read this, ‘Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings
you have furnished praise’?” (Matthew 21:16; Psalm
8:2) Jesus wanted those men to know that God’s
Word authorized what was happening there.
9

Those religious leaders later gathered together

and faced Jesus, demanding: “By what authority do
you do these things?” (Matthew 21:23) Jesus had
made abundantly clear the Source of his authority.
He had not innovated, inventing new doctrines. He
was simply applying what his Father’s inspired Word
said. Really, then, those priests and scribes were
showing gross disrespect for Jehovah and his Word.
They fully merited Jesus’ censure as he exposed the
wickedness of their motives.—Matthew 21:23-46.
134

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

10

Like Jesus, true Christians today rely on God’s

Word in the ministry. Jehovah’s Witnesses are
known the world over for their eagerness to share
with others a message from the Bible. Our publications quote and cite the Bible profusely. And in our
ministry, we follow suit, endeavoring to feature the
Scriptures whenever we talk to people. (2 Timothy
3:16) How it delights us when someone allows us to
read from the Bible and to discuss the value and
meaning of God’s Word! We do not have Jesus’ perfect memory, but we do have many tools that were
not available to Jesus. In addition to the complete
Bible printed in an ever-increasing number of languages, we have many Bible aids to help us ?nd any
verse we might seek. Let us be resolved to continue
quoting from the Bible and directing people to it at
every opportunity!
11

Defending God’s Word
Jesus found that God’s Word was under frequent

attack, but that surely did not surprise him. “Your
10. How can we imitate Jesus in the way that we use God’s Word, and
what tools do we have that were not available to Jesus?
11. Why did Jesus frequently have to defend God’s Word?
“IT IS WRITTEN”

135

word is truth,” Jesus said to his Father in prayer.
(John 17:17) And Jesus well knew that Satan, “the
ruler of the world,” is “a liar and the father of the
lie.” (John 8:44; 14:30) In rejecting Satan’s temptations, Jesus quoted from the Scriptures three times.
Satan quoted one verse from the Psalms, deliberately misapplying it, and Jesus responded by defending
God’s Word against this misuse.—Matthew 4:6, 7.
12

Jesus often defended the Holy Scriptures against

misuse, misinterpretation, and misrepresentation.
The religious teachers of his day represented God’s
Word in an unbalanced way. They put a lot of emphasis on observing the smallest particulars of the
Mosaic Law but very little on applying the principles on which the laws were based. They thus encouraged a super?cial form of worship, one concerned with outward appearances rather than with
weightier matters—such as justice, mercy, and faithfulness. (Matthew 23:23) How did Jesus defend
God’s Law?
13

In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus repeatedly

12-14. (a) How did the religious leaders show disrespect for the Mosaic Law? (b) How did Jesus defend God’s Word?
136

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

used the phrase “you heard that it was said” to introduce a statute of the Mosaic Law. He would follow up with the phrase “but I say to you” and then
expound on a principle that went deeper than the super?cial observance of the Law. Was he arguing
against the Law? No, he was defending it. For example, the people well knew the law “You must not
murder.” But Jesus told them that hating a person
violated the spirit of that law. Similarly, nourishing
passion for a person other than one’s mate violated
the principle underlying God’s law against adultery.
—Matthew 5:17, 18, 21, 22, 27-39.
14 Finally, Jesus said: “You heard that it was said,
‘You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
However, I say to you: Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you.” (Matthew 5:43, 44) Was the command to “hate your enemy” drawn from God’s Word? No, this precept was
something that the religious leaders taught of their
own originality. They watered down God’s perfect
Law with human thinking. Jesus fearlessly defended
God’s Word against the harmful e?ects of human
traditions.—Mark 7:9-13.
“IT IS WRITTEN”

137

15

The religious leaders also attacked God’s Law by

making it seem unduly strict, even harsh. When Jesus’ disciples plucked a few heads of grain while
passing through a ?eld, some Pharisees claimed that
they were violating the Sabbath. Jesus used a Scriptural example to defend God’s Word against this unbalanced view. He cited the only reference in the
Scriptures that deals with using the temple showbread outside the sanctuary—when David and his
hungry men ate it. Jesus showed those Pharisees that
they had missed the point of Jehovah’s mercy and
compassion.—Mark 2:23-27.
16

Religious leaders also devised legalistic loop-

holes to weaken the force of God’s Law. For instance, the Law allowed a man to divorce his wife if
he found “something indecent” on her part, evidently some serious problem that brought shame on the
household. (Deuteronomy 24:1) However, by Jesus’
day, the religious leaders used that concession as an
15. How did Jesus defend God’s Law against attempts to make it seem
unduly strict, even harsh?
16. What had the religious leaders done to Moses’ command regarding
divorce, and how did Jesus respond?
138

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

excuse to allow a man to divorce his wife on all manner of grounds—even for burning his supper!1 Jesus
showed that they had badly misrepresented Moses’
inspired words. He then restored Jehovah’s original
standard for marriage, that of monogamy, leaving
sexual immorality as the only proper grounds for divorce.—Matthew 19:3-12.
17

Christ’s followers today feel similarly compelled

to defend the Sacred Scriptures against attack.
When religious leaders imply that the moral standards of God’s Word are out-of-date, they are actually attacking the Bible. The Bible is also under attack when religions teach falsehoods and present
them as Bible doctrines. We count it a privilege to
come to the defense of God’s pure Word of truth
—showing, for instance, that God is not part of
a Trinity. (Deuteronomy 4:39) At the same time,
we make any such defense graciously, with genuine
mildness and deep respect.—1 Peter 3:15.
1 The ?rst-century historian Josephus, himself a divorced Pharisee,
later suggested that divorce was allowable “for any cause whatsoever
(and many such causes happen among men).”

17. How may Christians today imitate Jesus in defending God’s Word?
“IT IS WRITTEN”

139

18

Explaining God’s Word
Jesus was alive in heaven when the Hebrew

Scriptures were recorded. How he must have enjoyed the opportunity to come to the earth and take
part in explaining God’s Word! Think, for example,
of that memorable day after his resurrection when
he met up with two of his disciples on the road to
Emmaus. Before they recognized who he was, they
told him how saddened and confused they were over
the death of their beloved Master. How did he respond? “Commencing at Moses and all the Prophets
he interpreted to them things pertaining to himself
in all the Scriptures.” How were they a?ected? They
later said to each other: “Were not our hearts burning as he was speaking to us on the road, as he
was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”—Luke
24:15-32.
19

Later that same day, Jesus met with his apostles

and others. Note what he did for them: “He opened
up their minds fully to grasp the meaning of the
Scriptures.” (Luke 24:45) No doubt, that happy oc18, 19. What examples show that Jesus had a marvelous ability to explain God’s Word?
140

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

casion brought back to their minds the many, many
times that Jesus had done something similar for
them—and for any who would listen. He often took
well-known scriptures and explained them in such
a way that something wonderful blossomed in the
minds of his listeners—a new and deeper understanding of God’s Word.
20

On one such occasion, Jesus was speaking to a

group of Sadducees. They were a sect of Judaism associated with the Jewish priesthood, and they did
not believe in the resurrection. Jesus said to them:
“As regards the resurrection of the dead, did you not
read what was spoken to you by God, saying, ‘I am
the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the
God of Jacob’? He is the God, not of the dead, but
of the living.” (Matthew 22:31, 32) Here was a scripture they knew well, written down by a man that the
Sadducees revered—Moses. Do you see, though, the
force of Jesus’ explanation?
21

Moses had his conversation with Jehovah at the

burning bush about the year 1514 B.C.E. (Exodus
20, 21. How did Jesus explain the words that Jehovah had spoken to
Moses at the burning bush?
“IT IS WRITTEN”

141

3:2, 6) At that time, Abraham had been dead for
329 years, Isaac for 224, and Jacob for 197. Yet, Jehovah still said: “I am” their God. Those Sadducees
knew that Jehovah is not like some pagan god of the
dead, ruling a mythical underworld. No, he is the
God “of the living,” as Jesus said. What must that
mean? Jesus’ conclusion was forceful: “They are all
living to him.” (Luke 20:38) Jehovah’s beloved servants who have died are safely preserved in God’s
limitless, unfading memory. So sure is Jehovah’s
purpose to resurrect such ones that they may be spoken of as living. (Romans 4:16, 17) Is that not a marvelous explanation of God’s Word? No wonder “the
crowds were astounded”!—Matthew 22:33.
22

Christians today have the privilege of imitating

Jesus’ way of explaining God’s Word. Granted, we do
not have a perfect mind. Nonetheless, we often get
to share with others a scripture they already know
and explain to them aspects of it they may never
even have considered. For instance, they may have
repeated “Hallowed be thy name” and “Thy kingdom
22, 23. (a) How may we imitate Jesus in explaining God’s Word?
(b) What will we consider in the next chapter?
142

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

Why should we be careful never to let human
opinion or tradition come ahead of God’s Word?
—Matthew 15:2-11.

?

When we are answering questions, why is it wise
to direct attention to the Bible?—Luke 10:25-28.

?

How can we imitate Jesus in his willingness to
let God’s prophetic Word guide his life course and
decisions?—Luke 18:31-34; 22:37.

?

Whenever our beliefs come under attack, why
should we base any defense we make on God’s
Word?—John 10:31-39.

come” for a lifetime without ever learning God’s
name or what his Kingdom is. (Matthew 6:9, 10,
King James Version) What a wonderful opportunity
we have when someone allows us to o?er clear, simple explanations of such Bible truths!
23

Quoting from God’s Word, defending it, and ex-

plaining it are keys to imitating Jesus’ way of sharing the truth. Let us next consider some of the e?ective methods Jesus used to reach the hearts of his
listeners with Bible truths.
“IT IS WRITTEN”

143

CHAPTER

11

“Never Has Another Man
Spoken Like This”
THE Pharisees are ?lled with anger. Jesus is in the
temple, teaching about his Father. Those listening
are divided; many put faith in Jesus, while others
want him arrested. Unable to contain their anger,
the religious leaders dispatch o?cers to lay hold
of Jesus. The o?cers, however, come back emptyhanded. The chief priests and Pharisees demand an
explanation: “Why is it you did not bring him in?”
The o?cers reply: “Never has another man spoken
like this.” They were so impressed with Jesus’ teaching that they could not bring themselves to arrest
him.1—John 7:45, 46.
2 Those o?cers were not the only ones impressed
with Jesus’ teaching. People assembled in great numbers just to hear him teach. (Mark 3:7, 9; 4:1; Luke
5:1-3) Why was Jesus such an outstanding teacher?
1 The o?cers were likely agents of the Sanhedrin and under the authority of the chief priests.

1, 2. (a) Why did the o?cers who were sent to lay hold of Jesus return
empty-handed? (b) Why was Jesus an outstanding teacher?
144

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

As we saw in Chapter 8, he loved the truths he conveyed, and he loved the people he taught. He also
had a masterful grasp of teaching methods. Let us
consider three of the e?ective methods he used and
how we can imitate them.
Keeping It Simple
3 Can you imagine the range of vocabulary that Jesus could have had at his disposal? Yet, when he
taught, he never spoke over the heads of his audience, many of whom were “unlettered and ordinary.”
(Acts 4:13) He was considerate of their limitations,
never overwhelming them with too much information. (John 16:12) His words were simple, but the
truths they conveyed were nothing less than profound.
4 Take, for example, the Sermon on the Mount, recorded at Matthew 5:3–7:27. Jesus gave counsel in
this sermon that goes deep, getting to the very heart
of matters. There are no complicated ideas or phrases. Why, there is hardly a word that even a young
child cannot readily grasp! No wonder, then, that
3, 4. (a) Why did Jesus use plain language in his teaching? (b) How
is the Sermon on the Mount an example of the simplicity with which Jesus taught?
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

145

when Jesus ?nished, the crowds—likely including
many farmers, shepherds, and ?shermen—“were astounded at his way of teaching.”—Matthew 7:28.
5 In his teaching, Jesus often used simple, short
phrases and uttered sayings that were rich in meaning. In an era long before printed books, he thus
implanted his message indelibly in the minds and
hearts of his listeners. Consider some examples:
“Stop judging that you may not be judged.” “Persons
in health do not need a physician, but the ailing do.”
“The spirit . . . is eager, but the ?esh is weak.” “Pay
back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to
God.” “There is more happiness in giving than there
is in receiving.”1 (Matthew 7:1; 9:12; 26:41; Mark 12:
17; Acts 20:35) Nearly 2,000 years after they were
?rst spoken, those sayings are as memorable as ever.
6 How can we teach with simplicity? One impor1 This last statement, found at Acts 20:35, is quoted only by the
apostle Paul. He may have received it by word of mouth (either from
someone who heard Jesus say it or from the resurrected Jesus) or by
divine revelation.

5. Give examples of sayings uttered by Jesus that were simple but rich
in meaning.
6, 7. (a) To teach with simplicity, why is it important that we use plain
language? (b) How can we avoid overwhelming a Bible student with too
much information?
146

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

tant requirement is that we use plain language that
most people can readily grasp. The basic truths of
God’s Word are not complicated. Jehovah has revealed his purposes to those who have sincere and
humble hearts. (1 Corinthians 1:26-28) Simple words
carefully chosen can e?ectively convey the truths of
God’s Word.
7

To teach with simplicity, we must be careful to

avoid overwhelming a Bible student with too much
information. Thus, when conducting a Bible study,
we do not need to explain every detail; nor is it
necessary to rush through the material as if covering a set amount of pages is of primary importance. Rather, it is wise to let the student’s needs
and abilities determine the pace of the study. Our
goal is to help the student to become a follower of
Christ and a worshipper of Jehovah. To that end,
we need to take whatever time is necessary for the
student to get a reasonable grasp of what he is
learning. Only then will Bible truth touch his heart
and move him to apply what he has learned.—Romans 12:2.
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

147

8

Asking the Right Questions
Jesus made remarkable use of questions, even

when it would have taken less time just to tell his listener the point. Why, then, did he ask questions? At
times, he used penetrating questions to expose the
motives of his opposers, thereby silencing them.
(Matthew 21:23-27; 22:41-46) In many cases, however, he used questions to get his disciples to express
what was on their minds and to stimulate and train
their thinking. Hence, he asked such questions as,
“What do you think?” and “Do you believe this?”
(Matthew 18:12; John 11:26) With his questions, Jesus reached and touched the hearts of his disciples.
Consider an example.
9

On one occasion, tax collectors asked Peter if

Jesus paid the temple tax.1 Peter immediately answered, “Yes.” Later, Jesus reasoned with him:
1 The Jews were required to pay an annual temple tax of two drachmas, which was about two days’ wages. One reference work says:
“This tax was chie?y utilized to defray the expenses of the daily
burnt-o?ering and of all the sacri?ces in general made in the name
of the people.”

8, 9. (a) Why did Jesus ask questions? (b) How did Jesus use questions
to help Peter reach the right conclusion on the matter of paying the temple tax?
148

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

“What do you think, Simon? From whom do the
kings of the earth receive duties or head tax? From
their sons or from the strangers?” Peter responded:
“From the strangers.” Jesus said: “Really, then, the
sons are tax-free.” (Matthew 17:24-27) The point of
the questions was no doubt obvious to Peter, for the
family members of kings were known to be taxexempt. Therefore, as the only-begotten Son of the
heavenly King who was worshipped at the temple,
Jesus was not under obligation to pay the tax. Note
that rather than just telling Peter the right answer,
Jesus tactfully used questions to help Peter reach the
right conclusion and perhaps see the need to think
more carefully before answering in the future.
10

How can we make e?ective use of questions in

our ministry? When preaching from house to house,
we can use questions to arouse interest, perhaps
opening the way for us to share the good news. For
example, if an older person comes to the door, we
might respectfully bring up the question, “How has
the world changed in your lifetime?” After allowing
10. How can we make e?ective use of questions when preaching from
house to house?
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

149

for a response, we might then ask, “What do you
think it would take to make this world a better place
in which to live?” (Matthew 6:9, 10) If a mother
with small children answers the door, we could ask,
“Have you ever wondered what this world will be like
when your children grow up?” (Psalm 37:10, 11) By
being observant when we approach a house, we may
be able to choose a question that is tailored to the
interests of the householder.
11

How can we put questions to good use when con-

ducting a Bible study? Carefully chosen questions
can help us to draw out the feelings of the student’s
heart. (Proverbs 20:5) For example, suppose we are
studying the chapter “Living in a Way That Pleases
God” in the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?1
The chapter discusses God’s view of such matters
as sexual immorality, drunkenness, and lying. The
student’s answers may indicate that he understands
what the Bible teaches, but does he agree with what
he is learning? We might ask, “Does God’s view of
1 Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

11. How can we put questions to good use when conducting a Bible
study?
150

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

such matters seem reasonable to you?” We might
also ask, “How can you apply this information in
your life?” Keep in mind, though, the need to be tactful, according the student dignity. We never want to
ask questions that needlessly embarrass him.—Proverbs 12:18.
12

Employing Powerful Logic
With his perfect mind, Jesus was a master at

reasoning with others. At times, he employed powerful logic to refute the false charges of his opposers. In many instances, he used persuasive reasoning to teach his followers valuable lessons. Let us
look at some examples.
13

After Jesus healed a demon-possessed man

who was blind and unable to speak, the Pharisees
charged: “This fellow does not expel the demons
except by means of Beelzebub [Satan], the ruler
of the demons.” They conceded that superhuman
power was needed to expel the demons. However,
they attributed Jesus’ power to Satan. The charge
12-14. (a) In what ways did Jesus use his ability to employ logical reasoning? (b) What powerful logic did Jesus use when the Pharisees
attributed his power to Satan?
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

151

was not only false but also illogical. Exposing the
error of their thinking, Jesus replied: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to desolation, and
every city or house divided against itself will not
stand. In the same way, if Satan expels Satan, he
has become divided against himself; how, then,
will his kingdom stand?” (Matthew 12:22-26) Jesus
was, in e?ect, saying: “If I were an agent of Satan, undoing what Satan did, then Satan would be
working against his own interests and would soon
fall.” How could they refute such convincing logic?
14

Jesus had not yet ?nished reasoning with them.

Knowing that some of the Pharisees’ own disciples
had cast out demons, he asked a simple but powerful question: “If I expel the demons by means of
Beelzebub, by means of whom do your sons [or,
disciples] expel them?” (Matthew 12:27) Jesus’ argument, in a sense, was this: “If I expel demons by
means of the power of Satan, then your own disciples must be using this same power.” What could
the Pharisees say? They would never acknowledge
that their disciples acted under Satan’s power. Je152

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

sus thus pressed their faulty reasoning to what was
for them a very uncomfortable conclusion. Is it
not thrilling just to read about how Jesus reasoned with them? Imagine, though, the crowds who
heard Jesus ?rsthand, for his presence and the
tone of his voice no doubt increased the force of
his words.
15

Jesus also used logical, persuasive reasoning to

teach positive, heartwarming truths about his Father. He often did so by employing a “how much
more so” line of reasoning—helping his listeners
to advance from a familiar truth to an even stronger conviction.1 Based on contrast, this type of
reasoning can make a deep impression. Let us examine just two examples.
16

When responding to his disciples’ request to

teach them how to pray, Jesus described the willingness of imperfect human parents “to give good
1 This type of reasoning is sometimes termed “a fortiori,” a Latin
expression meaning “for a still stronger reason; even more certain;
all the more.”

15-17. Relate an example of how Jesus used a “how much more so” line
of reasoning to teach heartwarming truths about his Father.
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

153

gifts” to their children. He then concluded: “If you,
although being wicked, know how to give good
gifts to your children, how much more so will the
Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:1-13) The point Jesus made is
based on contrast. If sinful human parents care for
the needs of their children, how much more will
our heavenly Father, who is perfect and righteous
in every way, grant holy spirit to his loyal worshippers who humbly approach him in prayer!
17

Jesus used similar reasoning when o?ering

wise counsel on dealing with anxiety. He said:
“The ravens neither sow seed nor reap, and they
have neither barn nor storehouse, and yet God
feeds them. Of how much more worth are you than
birds? Mark well how the lilies grow; they neither
toil nor spin . . . If, now, God thus clothes the vegetation in the ?eld that today exists and tomorrow
is cast into an oven, how much rather will he clothe
you, you with little faith!” (Luke 12:24, 27, 28) If
Jehovah cares for birds and ?owers, how much
more will he care for humans who love and wor154

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ship him! With such reasoning, Jesus no doubt
touched the hearts of his listeners.
18

In our ministry, we want to use sound logic to

refute false beliefs. We also want to use persuasive
reasoning to teach positive truths about Jehovah.
(Acts 19:8; 28:23, 24) Must we learn to employ sophisticated logic? Not at all. The lesson we learn
from Jesus is that logical arguments presented in
a simple manner are most e?ective.
19

For instance, how might we respond if some-

one says that he does not believe in a God he cannot see? We could reason on the natural law of
cause and e?ect. When we observe an e?ect, we realize that there must be a cause. We might say: “If
you were in a remote area and came across a wellbuilt house that was stocked with food (e?ect),
would you not readily acknowledge that someone (a cause) was responsible? So, too, when we
see the obvious design built into nature and the
abundance of food stocked in earth’s ‘cupboards’
18, 19. How might we reason with someone who says that he does not
believe in a God he cannot see?
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

155

(e?ect), does it not make sense to conclude that
Someone (a Cause) is responsible? The Bible itself
reasons in this way: ‘Every house is constructed
by someone, but he that constructed all things is
God.’ ” (Hebrews 3:4) Of course, no matter how
sound our reasoning, not everyone will be convinced.—2 Thessalonians 3:2.
20

In our teaching, whether in the ?eld ministry

or in the congregation, we can also use the “how
much more so” line of reasoning to highlight Jehovah’s qualities and ways. For example, to show
that the doctrine of eternal torment in hell?re actually dishonors Jehovah, we might say: “What loving father would punish his child by holding his
child’s hand in a ?re? How much more must the
very idea of hell?re be repugnant to our loving
heavenly Father!” (Jeremiah 7:31) To assure a depressed fellow believer of Jehovah’s love for him,
we could say: “If Jehovah considers even a tiny
20, 21. (a) How can we use a “how much more so” line of reasoning
to highlight Jehovah’s qualities and ways? (b) What will we discuss in
the next chapter?
156

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

How might Jesus’ comments help you to choose
your words when you are giving talks in the
congregation?—Matthew 11:25.

?

In what ways can public speakers imitate Jesus’
use of this type of question?—Matthew 11:7-9.

?

How might you make discreet use of hyperbole in
your teaching?—Matthew 7:3; 19:24.

?

How could we, like Jesus, use object lessons in
teaching others?—John 13:5, 14.

sparrow to be of value, how much more must he
care about and love each of his earthly worshippers, including you!” (Matthew 10:29-31) Such reasoning can help us to reach the hearts of others.
21

After examining just three of the teaching

methods that Jesus used, we can easily see that
those o?cers who failed to arrest him were not
overstating matters when they said: “Never has another man spoken like this.” In the next chapter,
we will discuss the teaching method for which Jesus is perhaps best known, that of using illustrations.
“NEVER HAS ANOTHER MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”

157

CHAPTER

12

“Without an Illustration
He Would Not Speak to Them”
THE disciples traveling with Jesus have a rare privilege. They are learning directly from the Great
Teacher. They get to hear his voice as he opens up
the meaning of God’s Word and teaches them thrilling truths. For now, they must carry his precious sayings in their minds and hearts; it is not yet the time
for his words to be preserved in writing.1 However,
Jesus makes it easier for them to remember what he
teaches. How? By his way of teaching, especially his
masterful use of illustrations.
2

Indeed, e?ective illustrations are not quickly for-

gotten. One author noted that illustrations “turn
ears into eyes” and that they “free listeners to think
with pictures in their heads.” Because we often
think best in pictures, illustrations can make even
1 The ?rst inspired record of Jesus’ earthly life was evidently the
Gospel of Matthew, written about eight years after Jesus’ death.

1-3. (a) The disciples traveling with Jesus have what rare privilege, and
how does he make it easier for them to remember what he teaches?
(b) Why are e?ective illustrations easy to remember?
158

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

abstract ideas easier to grasp. Illustrations can bring
words to life, teaching us lessons that become etched
in our memory.
3

No teacher on earth has ever been more skillful

at using illustrations than was Jesus Christ. To this
day, his illustrations are easily recalled. Why did Jesus rely heavily on this method of teaching? What
made his illustrations so e?ective? How can we learn
to use this teaching method?
4

Why Jesus Taught With Illustrations
The Bible gives two important reasons why Jesus

used illustrations. First, his doing so ful?lled prophecy. At Matthew 13:34, 35, we read: “Jesus spoke to
the crowds by illustrations. Indeed, without an illustration he would not speak to them; that there might
be ful?lled what was spoken through the prophet
who said: ‘I will open my mouth with illustrations.’ ”
The prophet mentioned by Matthew was the writer of Psalm 78:2. That psalmist wrote under the
inspiration of God’s spirit centuries before Jesus’
birth. Consider what this means. Hundreds of years
4, 5. Why did Jesus use illustrations?
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

159

in advance, Jehovah determined that the Messiah
would teach with illustrations. Surely, then, Jehovah
must value this method of teaching.
5

Second, Jesus explained that he used illustrations

to sift out those whose hearts had “grown unreceptive.” (Matthew 13:10-15; Isaiah 6:9, 10) What was it
about his illustrations that exposed the motives of
people? In some cases, he wanted his listeners to ask
for an explanation in order to get the full meaning
of his words. Humble individuals were willing to ask,
whereas haughty or indi?erent ones were not. (Matthew 13:36; Mark 4:34) Jesus’ illustrations, then, revealed truth to those whose hearts hungered for it;
at the same time, his illustrations concealed truth
from those with proud hearts.
6

Jesus’ illustrations served a number of other ben-

e?cial purposes. They aroused interest, compelling
people to listen. They painted mental images that
were easy to grasp. As noted at the outset, Jesus’
illustrations helped his listeners to remember his
words. The Sermon on the Mount, as recorded at
6. Jesus’ illustrations served what bene?cial purposes?
160

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Matthew 5:3–7:27, is an outstanding example of Jesus’ generous use of word pictures. According to
one count, this sermon contains over 50 ?gures of
speech. To put that in perspective, keep in mind that
this sermon can be read aloud in about 20 minutes.
At that rate, a ?gure of speech is uttered, on average, nearly every 20 seconds! Clearly, Jesus saw the
value of painting a picture with words!
7

As followers of Christ, we want to imitate his way

of teaching, including his use of illustrations. Like
the seasonings that make a meal more appetizing, effective illustrations can make our teaching more appealing to others. Well-thought-out word pictures
can also make important truths easier to grasp. Let
us now take a closer look at some of the factors that
made Jesus’ illustrations so e?ective. Then we will
be able to see how we can put this valuable teaching
method to good use.
8

Using Simple Comparisons
In his teaching, Jesus often used comparisons

7. Why imitate Jesus’ use of illustrations?
8, 9. How did Jesus make use of simple comparisons, and what made
the comparisons he drew so e?ective?
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

161

that were uncomplicated, requiring just a few words.
Yet, the simple words painted vivid mental images
and clearly taught important spiritual truths. For example, when urging his disciples not to be anxious
over daily needs, he pointed to “the birds of heaven”
and “the lilies of the ?eld.” The birds do not sow and
reap, nor do the lilies spin and weave. Still, God
cares for them. The point is easy to see—namely,
that if God takes care of birds and ?owers, surely he
will look after humans who “keep . . . seeking ?rst
the kingdom.”—Matthew 6:26, 28-33.
9

Jesus also made generous use of metaphors,

which are even more forceful comparisons. A metaphor refers to one thing as if it were another. Here,
again, he kept the comparisons simple. On one occasion, he told his disciples: “You are the light of
the world.” The disciples could hardly miss the
point of the metaphor, namely, that through their
words and deeds, they could let the light of spiritual truth shine and help others to give glory to God.
(Matthew 5:14-16) Note some other metaphors used
by Jesus: “You are the salt of the earth” and “I am
162

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

the vine, you are the branches.” (Matthew 5:13;
John 15:5) Such ?gures of speech are powerful in
their simplicity.
10

How can you use illustrations in your teaching?

You do not have to come up with long, elaborate
stories. Just try to think of simple comparisons.
Imagine that you are discussing the subject of the
resurrection and that you want to illustrate that
raising the dead poses no problem for Jehovah.
What comparison comes to mind? The Bible uses
sleep as a metaphor for death. You might say, “God
can resurrect the dead as easily as we can awaken
someone from sleep.” (John 11:11-14) Suppose that
you want to illustrate that children need love and
a?ection if they are to thrive. What example could
you use? The Bible uses this comparison: Children
are “like slips [new shoots] of olive trees.” (Psalm
128:3) You could say, “Love and a?ection are to a
child what sunshine and water are to a tree.” The
simpler the comparison, the easier it will be for
your listeners to get the point.
10. What are some examples that show how you can use illustrations in
your teaching?
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

163

11

Drawing From Everyday Life
Jesus was a master at using illustrations that re-

lated to the lives of people. Many of his illustrations
re?ected everyday circumstances that he had likely
observed while growing up in Galilee. Think, for a
moment, about his early life. How often did he see
his mother grind grain into ?our, add leaven to
dough, light a lamp, or sweep the house? (Matthew
13:33; 24:41; Luke 15:8) How many times did he
watch the ?shermen as they let down their nets
into the Sea of Galilee? (Matthew 13:47) How often
did he observe children playing in the marketplace?
(Matthew 11:16) Jesus no doubt saw other commonplace things that are mentioned in his many illustrations—seeds being sown, joyful wedding feasts, and
grain ?elds ripening in the sun.—Matthew 13:3-8; 25:
1-12; Mark 4:26-29.
12

In his illustrations, Jesus mentioned details that

were well-known to his listeners. For example, he be11. Give examples of how Jesus’ illustrations re?ected things that he
had no doubt observed while growing up in Galilee.
12, 13. Why is it signi?cant that Jesus used the road that went “from
Jerusalem to Jericho” to make his point in the parable of the neighborly Samaritan?
164

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

gan the parable of the neighborly Samaritan by saying: “A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers, who both
stripped him and in?icted blows, . . . leaving him
half-dead.” (Luke 10:30) Signi?cantly, Jesus referred
to the road that went “from Jerusalem to Jericho”
to make his point. When relating this parable, he
was in Judea, not far from Jerusalem; so his listeners undoubtedly knew about the road in question.
That road was known to be dangerous, especially for
someone traveling alone. It wound through lonely
terrain, providing many lurking places for robbers.
13

Jesus included other familiar details about the

road that went “from Jerusalem to Jericho.” According to the parable, ?rst a priest and then a Levite were also traveling that road—although neither
stopped to help the victim. (Luke 10:31, 32) The
priests served at the temple in Jerusalem, and the Levites assisted them. Many priests and Levites resided
in Jericho when they were not working at the temple;
Jericho was only 14 miles from Jerusalem. Hence,
they could be seen on that road. Note, too, that Jesus
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

165

spoke of the traveler as “going down”—not up—the
road “from Jerusalem.” This made sense to his listeners. Jerusalem was higher in elevation than Jericho. Therefore, when traveling “from Jerusalem,” a
traveler would indeed be “going down.”1 Jesus clearly kept his listeners in mind.
14

When we use illustrations, we too need to keep

our audience in mind. What are some things about
our listeners that might have a bearing on our choice
of illustrations? Perhaps such factors as age, cultural or family background, and occupation come
into play. For instance, an illustration that mentions
details about farming might be more readily understood in an agricultural area than in a large
city. The everyday life and activities of our hearers
—their children, their house, their hobbies, their
food—might also provide the basis for ?tting illustrations.
1 Jesus also said that the priest and the Levite were coming “from
Jerusalem,” thus going away from the temple. Thus, no one could
excuse their indi?erence by saying that they avoided the man who appeared to be dead because they did not want to become temporarily
un?t to serve at the temple.—Leviticus 21:1; Numbers 19:16.

14. When using illustrations, how can we keep our audience in mind?
166

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

15

Drawing From Creation
Many of Jesus’ illustrations reveal his knowl-

edge of the natural world, including plants, animals,
and the elements. (Matthew 16:2, 3; Luke 12:24, 27)
Where did he get such knowledge? While growing up
in Galilee, he no doubt had ample opportunity to
observe creation. More signi?cantly, Jesus is “the
?rstborn of all creation,” and in creating all things,
Jehovah used him as the “master worker.” (Colossians 1:15, 16; Proverbs 8:30, 31) Is it any wonder
that Jesus was intimately acquainted with creation?
Let us see how he put this knowledge to skillful use.
16

Recall that Jesus identi?ed himself as “the ?ne

shepherd” and his followers as “the sheep.” Jesus’
words indicate that he was very familiar with the
traits of domestic sheep. He knew that there was a
unique bond between shepherds and their sheep.
He noted that these trusting creatures readily allowed themselves to be led and that they faithfully
15. Why is it no wonder that Jesus was intimately acquainted with creation?
16, 17. (a) What indicates that Jesus was very familiar with the traits
of sheep? (b) What example shows that sheep really do listen to the voice
of their shepherd?
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

167

followed their shepherd. Why do sheep follow their
shepherd? “Because they know his voice,” said Jesus.
(John 10:2-4, 11) Do sheep really know their shepherd’s voice?
17 From personal observation, George A. Smith
wrote in his book The Historical Geography of the Holy
Land: “Sometimes we enjoyed our noonday rest beside one of those Judaean wells, to which three or
four shepherds come down with their ?ocks. The
?ocks mixed with each other, and we wondered how
each shepherd would get his own again. But after the
watering and the playing were over, the shepherds
one by one went up di?erent sides of the valley, and
each called out his peculiar call; and the sheep of
each drew out of the crowd to their own shepherd,
and the ?ocks passed away as orderly as they came.”
Jesus could hardly have found a better illustration
to make his point, namely, that if we recognize and
obey his teachings and if we follow his lead, then we
can come under the care of “the ?ne shepherd.”
18 How can we learn to use illustrations that are
drawn from creation? The outstanding traits of ani18. Where can we ?nd information about Jehovah’s creations?
168

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

mals may provide the basis for simple but e?ective comparisons. Where can we ?nd information
about Jehovah’s creations? The Bible is a rich source
of knowledge about a variety of animals, and at
times, it uses animal traits in an illustrative way. The
Bible alludes to being as swift as a gazelle or a
leopard, as cautious as a snake, and as innocent
as a dove.1 (1 Chronicles 12:8; Habakkuk 1:8; Matthew 10:16) Other valuable sources of information
are The Watchtower, Awake!, and other literature produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses. You can learn much
from observing how these publications employ simple comparisons drawn from the wonders of Jehovah’s many creations.
Drawing From Familiar Examples
19 E?ective illustrations can take the form of reallife examples. On one occasion, Jesus used a recent
event to expose as false the belief that tragedy befalls those who deserve it. He said: “Those eighteen
1 For a more comprehensive list of the Bible’s ?gurative use of animal traits, see Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 1, pages 268, 270-1,
published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

19, 20. (a) To expose a false belief, how did Jesus make e?ective use
of a recent event? (b) How can we use true-life examples and experiences in our teaching?
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

169

upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, thereby killing
them, do you imagine that they were proved greater
debtors [sinners] than all other men inhabiting Jerusalem?” (Luke 13:4) Indeed, those 18 souls did not
perish because of some sin that provoked divine displeasure. Rather, their tragic death was a result of
“time and unforeseen occurrence.” (Ecclesiastes 9:
11) Jesus thus refuted a false teaching by referring
to an event that was well-known to his hearers.
20

How can we use true-life examples and experi-

ences in our teaching? Suppose that you are discussing the ful?llment of Jesus’ prophecy concerning the
sign of his presence. (Matthew 24:3-14) You might
refer to recent news items about wars, famines, or
earthquakes to show that speci?c features of the
sign are being ful?lled. Or imagine that you want to
use an experience to illustrate the changes involved
in putting on the new personality. (Ephesians 4:2024) Where can you ?nd such an experience? You
could consider the varied backgrounds of fellow believers, or you might use an experience printed in
one of the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
170

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

What aspects of creation did Jesus use in
his illustrations, and how might you use similar
examples?—Matthew 13:24-32.

?

How did Jesus use a simple illustration to make
a powerful point, and what do you learn from his
example?—Matthew 18:12-14.

?

What everyday experiences did Jesus draw on,
and how might his example help you to choose
illustrations?—Luke 11:5-8; 12:6.

Truly, Jesus was the Master Teacher! As we have
seen in this section, “teaching . . . and preaching the
good news” was his lifework. (Matthew 4:23) It is
our lifework too. The rewards of being an e?ective
teacher are great. When we teach, we are giving to
others, and such giving brings happiness. (Acts 20:
35) That happiness is the joy of knowing that we are
imparting something of genuine and lasting value
—the truth about Jehovah. We can also have the satisfaction that comes from knowing that we are following the example of Jesus, the greatest Teacher
ever to walk the earth.
21

21. What rewards come from being an e?ective teacher of God’s Word?
“WITHOUT AN ILLUSTRATION HE WOULD NOT SPEAK TO THEM”

171

S E C T I O N

3

“THE LOVE
THE CHRIST HAS
COMPELS US”
What motivates us to keep following Jesus?
The apostle Paul answers: “The love the Christ
has compels us.” (2 Corinthians 5:14) In this
section we will study the love that Jesus has—for
Jehovah, for mankind, and for us as
individuals. Such a study is truly compelling. Our
hearts are touched, and we feel compelled
to act, to make progress in following
our Master’s example.

172

CHAPTER

13

“I Love the Father”
AN AGED man dips his pen in ink, his mind full of
memories. His name is John, and he is the last living
apostle of Jesus Christ. Now about 100 years old,
John casts his thoughts back some seven decades to
a most memorable evening—the last one that he
and his fellow apostles spent with Jesus before His
death. With God’s holy spirit guiding him, John is
able to remember and write down events in great detail.
2 That night, Jesus made it clear that he would
soon be put to death. John alone reveals the reason
why Jesus said that he was going to submit to that
terrible end: “In order for the world to know that I
love the Father, even as the Father has given me
commandment to do, so I am doing. Get up, let us
go from here.”—John 14:31.
3 “I love the Father.” Nothing mattered more to Jesus than that. Not that he constantly repeated the
1, 2. What did the apostle John reveal about the ?nal evening that the
apostles spent with Jesus?
3. How did Jesus show that he loved his Father?
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

173

statement. In fact, John 14:31 is the only place in the
Bible record where we ?nd Jesus expressing his love
for his Father so directly. Yet, Jesus lived those
words. His love for Jehovah was in evidence daily.
Jesus’ courage, his obedience, and his endurance
were all evidence of his love for God. His entire ministry was motivated by this love.
4

Today, some may think of love as a soft quality.

They may think of love poems and love songs, perhaps even of the giddiness that is sometimes associated with romantic love. The Bible does discuss romantic love, although in a more digni?ed way than is
common now. (Proverbs 5:15-21) God’s Word spends
much more time, though, on discussing love of another kind. This love is not mere passion or ?eeting
emotion; nor is it a dry, intellectual philosophy. It
involves both heart and mind. Such love springs
from the innermost self, is governed by and in harmony with noble principles, and is expressed in positive action. It is anything but frivolous. “Love never fails,” says God’s Word.—1 Corinthians 13:8.
4, 5. The Bible promotes what kind of love, and what can be said about
Jesus’ love for Jehovah?
174

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

5

Of all humans who have ever lived, Jesus was the

foremost lover of Jehovah. No one has surpassed Jesus in living by the words he himself quoted as the
greatest of all divine commands: “You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with
your whole soul and with your whole mind and with
your whole strength.” (Mark 12:30) How did Jesus
develop such love? How did he keep his love for God
strong during his time on earth? And how can we imitate him?
6

The Oldest and Strongest B ond of Love
Have you ever worked on a project with a friend

and found that the two of you became better, closer
friends as a result? That pleasant experience may
provide some insight into the love that developed between Jehovah and his only-begotten Son. We have
referred more than once to Proverbs 8:30, but let us
take a closer look at that verse in its context. In verses 22 through 31, we ?nd an inspired description of
wisdom personi?ed. How do we know that these
words refer to God’s Son?
6, 7. How do we know that Proverbs 8:22-31 describes God’s Son, not
just the quality of wisdom?
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

175

7

In verse 22, wisdom says: “Jehovah himself pro-

duced me as the beginning of his way, the earliest of
his achievements of long ago.” More than just wisdom must be involved here, for that quality never
was “produced.” It never began to exist because Jehovah has always existed and he has always been
wise. (Psalm 90:2) God’s Son, however, was “the
?rstborn of all creation.” He was produced, or created; he was the earliest of all of Jehovah’s achievements. (Colossians 1:15) The Son existed before the
earth and the heavens, as described in Proverbs. And
as the Word, God’s own Spokesman, he was the perfect expression of Jehovah’s wisdom.—John 1:1.
8

How was the Son occupied during the vast ex-

panse of time before he came to earth? Verse 30 tells
us that he was beside God as “a master worker.”
What does that mean? Colossians 1:16 explains: “By
means of him all other things were created in the
heavens and upon the earth . . . All other things have
been created through him and for him.” So Jehovah,
the Creator, worked through his Son, the Master
8. How was the Son occupied during his prehuman existence, and what
might we think about when admiring creation?
176

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Worker, to bring every other creation into existence
—from the spirit creatures in the heavenly realm to
the immense physical universe, to the earth with its
wondrous variety of plant and animal life, to the pinnacle of earthly creation: humankind. In some respects, we might liken this cooperation between Father and Son to that of an architect working with a
builder, or contractor, who specializes in bringing
the architect’s ingenious designs to reality. When we
are awed by any facet of creation, we are actually
giving credit to the Great Architect. (Psalm 19:1)
However, we may also call to mind the long and happy collaboration between the Creator and his “master worker.”
9

When two imperfect humans work closely togeth-

er, they sometimes have a di?cult time getting along.
Not so with Jehovah and his Son! The Son worked
for aeons with the Father and was “glad before him
all the time.” (Proverbs 8:30) Yes, he delighted in
his Father’s company, and the feeling was mutual.
Naturally, the Son grew ever more like his Father,
9, 10. (a) What strengthened the bond between Jehovah and his Son?
(b) What can strengthen your bond with your heavenly Father?
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

177

learning to imitate God’s qualities. No wonder, then,
that the bond between Father and Son became so
strong! It can rightly be called the oldest and strongest bond of love in the whole universe.
10

What, though, can that mean for us? You might

feel that you could never build such a bond with Jehovah. Granted, none of us has the exalted position
of the Son. However, we do have a remarkable opportunity. Remember, Jesus drew closer to his Father by working with Him. Jehovah lovingly o?ers us
the opportunity to be his “fellow workers.” (1 Corinthians 3:9) As we follow Jesus’ example in the ministry, we should always keep in mind that we are
God’s fellow workers. Thus, the bond of love that
unites us with Jehovah grows ever stronger. Could
there be any greater privilege?
11

How Jesus Kept His Love for Jehovah Strong
In many ways, it is helpful to think of the love

in our heart as a living thing. Like a beautiful house11-13. (a) Why is it helpful to think of love as a living thing, and how
did young Jesus keep his love for Jehovah strong? (b) How did God’s
Son show his interest in learning from Jehovah, both before coming to
earth and later as a man?
178

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

plant, love needs to be nourished and cared for if it
is to grow and to thrive. Neglected, deprived of nourishment, it weakens and dies. Jesus did not take his
love for Jehovah for granted. He kept it strong and
thriving throughout his earthly sojourn. Let us see
how.
12

Think again of the incident when young Jesus

spoke up at the temple in Jerusalem. Recall his
words to his anxious parents: “Why did you have to
go looking for me? Did you not know that I must be
in the house of my Father?” (Luke 2:49) As a young
boy, Jesus evidently did not yet have any memory of
his prehuman existence. Still, his love for his Father,
Jehovah, was intense. He knew that such love naturally found its expression in worship. So there was
no place on earth as appealing to Jesus as his Father’s house of pure worship. He longed to be there
and hated to leave. Moreover, he was no passive
spectator. He was eager to learn about Jehovah and
to express what he knew. Such feelings did not begin
when he was 12 years old, nor did they end at that
age.
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

179

13

In his prehuman existence, the Son had eagerly

learned from his Father. A prophecy recorded at Isaiah 50:4-6 reveals that Jehovah gave his Son specialized education regarding his role as the Messiah. Even though such education included learning
about some of the hardships that would befall Jehovah’s Anointed One, the Son learned eagerly. Later,
after Jesus came to earth and grew to adulthood, he
remained eager to go to his Father’s house and share
in the worship and the learning that Jehovah wanted to see promoted there. The Bible thus reports on
Jesus’ faithful attendance at the temple and at the
synagogue. (Luke 4:16; 19:47) If we want to keep our
love for Jehovah alive and thriving, we need to be
diligent about attending Christian meetings, where
we worship Jehovah and deepen our knowledge and
appreciation of him.
14

Jesus also kept his love for Jehovah strong by

praying regularly. Although he was a friendly, gregarious man, it is striking to note that he valued solitude. For example, Luke 5:16 says: “He continued in
14, 15. (a) Why did Jesus seek solitude? (b) How did Jesus’ prayers
to his Father reveal intimacy and respect?
180

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

retirement in the deserts and praying.” Similarly,
Matthew 14:23 states: “Eventually, having sent the
crowds away, he went up into the mountain by himself to pray. Though it became late, he was there
alone.” Jesus sought solitude on these and other occasions, not because he was a recluse or hated the
company of others, but because he wanted to be
alone with Jehovah, to speak freely with his Father
in prayer.
15

When he prayed, Jesus would at times use the ex-

pression “Abba, Father.” (Mark 14:36) In Jesus’ day,
“Abba” was an intimate word for “father,” a family
word. It was often among the ?rst words that a child
would learn. Yet, it was respectful. While the word
revealed the intimacy of the Son speaking to his beloved Father, it also conveyed profound respect for
Jehovah’s fatherly authority. We ?nd that combination of intimacy and respect throughout Jesus’ recorded prayers. For example, in John chapter 17, the
apostle John recorded the long and heartfelt prayer
that Jesus o?ered on His ?nal night. It is truly moving for us to study that prayer and vital that we
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

181

imitate it—not by repeating Jesus’ words, of course,
but by ?nding ways to speak from the heart to our
heavenly Father as often as we can. Doing so will
keep our love for him alive and strong.
16

As we noted earlier, Jesus did not repeatedly ut-

ter the words “I love the Father.” However, many
times he did put his love for his Father into words.
How so? Jesus himself said: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth.” (Matthew 11:25)
When studying Section 2 of this book, we saw that
Jesus loved to praise his Father by helping people
get to know Him. For example, he likened Jehovah
to a father who was so eager to forgive his wayward
son that he awaited the repentant young man’s arrival, caught sight of him from afar, and ran to meet
him and embrace him. (Luke 15:20) Who can read
that passage without feeling warmed by Jesus’ portrayal of Jehovah’s love and forgiveness?
17

Jesus often praised his Father for His generosi-

ty. He used the example of imperfect parents to
show how certain we can be that our Father will give
16, 17. (a) How did Jesus put his love for his Father into words?
(b) How did Jesus portray his Father’s generosity?
182

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

us all the holy spirit we need. (Luke 11:13) Jesus also
spoke about the hope that the Father so generously
o?ers. Jesus longingly described his own hope of being restored to a place by his Father’s side in heaven. (John 14:28; 17:5) He told his followers about the
hope that Jehovah held out to Christ’s “little ?ock”
—that of residing in heaven and sharing in the rule
of the Messianic King. (Luke 12:32; John 14:2) And
he consoled a dying wrongdoer with the hope of life
in Paradise. (Luke 23:43) Speaking of his Father’s
great generosity in these ways surely helped Jesus to
keep his love for Jehovah strong. Many of Christ’s
followers have found that nothing strengthens their
love for Jehovah or their faith in him more than
speaking about him and the hope he provides for
those who love him.
18

Will You Imitate Jesus’ Love for Jehovah?
Of all the ways in which we need to follow Je-

sus, none is more important than this: We must
love Jehovah with our whole heart, soul, mind, and
strength. (Luke 10:27) The measure of such love is
18. What is the most important way in which we need to follow Jesus,
and why?
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

183

not just in the intensity of our feelings but also in
the reality of our actions. Jesus was not content
merely to feel love for his Father nor merely to say,
“I love the Father.” He said: “In order for the world
to know that I love the Father, even as the Father has
given me commandment to do, so I am doing.” (John
14:31) Satan had charged that no human would serve
Jehovah out of unsel?sh love. (Job 2:4, 5) In order to
give the best possible answer to Satan’s vicious slander, Jesus courageously went ahead and showed the
world just how much he loved his Father. He obeyed
even to the point of giving up his life. Will you follow Jesus? Will you show the world that you truly
love Jehovah God?
19

We have a profound spiritual need to show such

love. Jehovah has thus arranged for us to worship in
a way that our love for our Father is nourished
and strengthened. When you attend Christian meetings, try to remember that you are there to worship
your God. Facets of that worship include joining in
19, 20. (a) For what important reasons do we want to be regular in attendance at Christian meetings? (b) How might we view our personal
study, meditation, and prayer?
184

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

heartfelt prayer, singing songs of praise, listening
attentively, and participating when possible. Such
meetings also give you an opportunity to encourage
fellow Christians. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) Worshipping
Jehovah regularly at Christian meetings will help
you to grow ever stronger in your love for God.
20

Much the same can be said for doing personal

study, meditating, and praying. Think of these as
ways to be alone with Jehovah. As you study God’s
written Word and meditate on it, Jehovah is conveying his thoughts to you. As you pray, you are opening your heart to him. Remember that prayer involves more than just asking God for things. Prayer
is also an opportunity to thank Jehovah for the
blessings you have received and to praise him for his
marvelous works. (Psalm 146:1) Additionally, praising Jehovah publicly with joy and enthusiasm is the
best way to thank Jehovah and to show that you love
him.
21

Love for God is the key to your eternal happi-

ness. It is all that Adam and Eve would have needed
21. How important is love for Jehovah, and what will be considered in
the ensuing chapters?
“I LOVE THE FATHER”

185

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

When we pray, how can we show con?dence
in Jehovah, as Jesus did?—John 11:41, 42;
Hebrews 11:6.

?

How can we express heartfelt love for Jehovah in
the way we use his name?—John 17:6-8.

?

Why does love for Jehovah require that we
imitate Jesus in remaining separate from the world?
—John 17:14-16; James 4:8.

?

How can we apply Jesus’ counsel about
maintaining intense love for Jehovah?
—Revelation 2:1-5.

in order to succeed—and the one thing that they
failed to develop. It is the most important thing that
you need in order to pass any test of faith, reject any
temptation, endure any trial. It is at the very heart
of being a follower of Jesus. Of course, love for God
is connected to love for our fellow man. (1 John 4:
20) In the ensuing chapters, we will examine how Jesus showed his love for people. In the next chapter,
we will consider why so many found Jesus approachable.
186

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

CHAPTER

14

“Great Crowds Approached Him”
JESUS knows that the end of his earthly life is fast
approaching. He has just a few weeks left, and there
is still so much to do! He is preaching with his apostles in Perea, a region east of the Jordan River.
They are working their way south toward Jerusalem,
where Jesus will attend his ?nal, climactic Passover.
2

After Jesus has a weighty discussion with some

religious leaders, there is a small disturbance. People are bringing their children to see him. Evidently, the children vary in age, for Mark refers to them
by the same word that he earlier used to describe a
child of 12, while Luke uses a word that can be rendered “infants.” (Luke 18:15; Mark 5:41, 42; 10:13)
Of course, wherever there are children, there is often some exuberant noise and commotion. Jesus’ disciples reprimand the parents, perhaps assuming that
the Master is too busy to bother with the children.
What does Jesus do?
1-3. What happens when parents bring their children to Jesus, and what
does this incident reveal about Jesus?
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

187

3

When he sees what is going on, Jesus is indig-

nant. With whom? The children? The parents? No
—with his disciples! He says: “Let the young children
come to me; do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of God belongs to suchlike ones. Truly I say to
you, Whoever does not receive the kingdom of God
like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
Then Jesus takes the children “into his arms,” blessing them. (Mark 10:13-16) Mark’s language here suggests that Jesus a?ectionately embraces them, perhaps even cradling some infants “in the crook of his
arm,” as one translator puts it. Clearly, Jesus is fond
of children. However, we learn something else about
him here—he is approachable.
4

If Jesus had been a stern, cold, or proud man,

likely those children would not have been drawn to
him; nor would their parents have felt free to approach him. As you picture the scene, can you not
just see the parents beaming as this kind man shows
his a?ection for their children, acknowledges the
children’s worth in God’s eyes, and blesses them? In4, 5. (a) How can we be sure that Jesus was approachable? (b) What
questions will we examine in this chapter?
188

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

deed, though Jesus was burdened with the heaviest
of responsibilities, he remained the most approachable of men.
5

Who else found Jesus approachable? What made

him so easy to approach? And how can we learn to
be like Jesus in this regard? Let us see.
6

Who Found Jesus Approachable?
As you read the Gospel accounts, you may be

struck by the way that great numbers of people did
not hesitate to approach Jesus. For example, in connection with him, we often read of “great crowds.”
“Great crowds followed him from Galilee.” “Great
crowds gathered to him.” “Great crowds approached
him.” “Great crowds were traveling with him.” (Matthew 4:25; 13:2; 15:30; Luke 14:25) Yes, Jesus was often surrounded by multitudes of people.
7

Generally, these were the common folk, those

whom the religious leaders contemptuously referred to as “people of the land.” The Pharisees and
priests openly said: “This crowd that does not know
the Law are accursed people.” (John 7:49) Later
6-8. Jesus was often in the company of whom, and how did his attitude
toward them di?er from that of the religious leaders?
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

189

rabbinic writings con?rm that attitude. Many religious leaders viewed such people as contemptible,
refusing to eat with them, buy from them, or associate with them. Why, some insisted that there was
no hope of a resurrection for such ones who did not
know the oral law! Many lowly people must have
shied away from such leaders rather than asking
them for help or guidance. But Jesus was di?erent.
8 Jesus mingled freely with the common people.
He ate with them, healed them, taught them, and
gave them hope. Of course, Jesus was realistic, acknowledging that most would reject the opportunity to serve Jehovah. (Matthew 7:13, 14) However, he
viewed each individual with hope and saw in many
the potential to do what was right. What a contrast
to those hard-hearted priests and Pharisees! Surprisingly, though, even priests and Pharisees approached
Jesus, and a number of them did change their ways
and follow him. (Acts 6:7; 15:5) Some of the rich
and powerful also found Jesus to be approachable.
—Mark 10:17, 22.
9 Women did not hesitate to approach Jesus. They
9. Why did women ?nd Jesus approachable?
190

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

must often have felt the withering contempt of religious leaders. The rabbis generally frowned upon
teaching women. In fact, women were not allowed to
testify in legal cases; they were viewed as unreliable
witnesses. The rabbis even said a prayer in which
they thanked God that they were not women! Yet,
women found no such contempt in Jesus. Many approached him, eager to learn. For instance, we ?nd
Lazarus’ sister Mary sitting at the Lord’s feet, absorbed in listening to Jesus’ words while her sister,
Martha, bustled about and fretted over the preparation of food. Jesus commended Mary for setting
proper priorities.—Luke 10:39-42.
10

The sick too ?ocked to Jesus, although they were

often treated as outcasts by the religious leaders.
The Mosaic Law had provisions for quarantining
lepers for health reasons, but there was no basis for
unkindness. (Leviticus, chapter 13) Later rabbinic
rules, however, stated that lepers were as o?ensive
as excrement. Some religious leaders went so far as
to throw stones at lepers to keep them at a distance!
10. How was Jesus di?erent from the religious leaders in the way he
dealt with the sick?
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

191

It is hard to imagine how those who had been treated that way could summon the courage to approach
any teacher, but lepers did approach Jesus. One uttered this famous expression of faith: “Lord, if you
just want to, you can make me clean.” (Luke 5:12) In
the next chapter, we will discuss Jesus’ response. For
now, su?ce it to say that there could hardly be more
vivid proof that Jesus was approachable.
11

Those who felt burdened by guilt freely ap-

proached Jesus. Think, for example, of the time
when Jesus was dining at the home of a Pharisee.
A woman who was known to be a sinner came in
and knelt at Jesus’ feet, weeping over her guilt. Her
tears bathed his feet, and she used her hair to dry
them. While Jesus’ host recoiled and judged Jesus
harshly for allowing this woman to come near, Jesus kindly commended the woman for her sincere
repentance and assured her of Jehovah’s forgiveness. (Luke 7:36-50) Today more than ever, people who are loaded down with guilt need to feel free
to approach those who can help them make things
11. What example shows that those burdened with guilt felt free to approach Jesus, and why is this important?
192

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

right with God! What was it that made Jesus so approachable?
12

What Made Jesus Approachable?
Remember that Jesus perfectly imitated his be-

loved heavenly Father. (John 14:9) The Bible reminds us that Jehovah “is not far o? from each one
of us.” (Acts 17:27) The “Hearer of prayer,” Jehovah,
is ever accessible to his faithful servants and to any
others who sincerely want to ?nd him and serve him.
(Psalm 65:2) Just imagine—the most powerful and
important Personage in the universe is also the most
approachable! Like his Father, Jesus loves people. In
the chapters that follow, we will discuss the love that
ran deep in Jesus’ heart. Jesus was approachable,
though, largely because his love for people was easy
to see. Let us examine some of Jesus’ traits that demonstrated such love.
13

People readily sensed that Jesus was personal-

ly interested in them. That personal interest did
not vanish when Jesus was under pressure. As we
have already seen, when those parents brought their
12. Why is it not surprising that Jesus was approachable?
13. How might parents imitate Jesus?
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

193

children to him, Jesus remained approachable even
when he was busy, loaded down with weighty responsibilities. What an example he set for parents! Raising children is a challenge in today’s world. Yet, it is
vital that children see their parents as approachable.
If you are a parent, you know that there are times
when you are too busy to give your child the attention he calls for. Still, can you assure him that you
will make time for him as soon as possible? As you
keep your word, your child will learn the rewards of
patience. He will also learn that he is always welcome to approach you with any problem or care.
14

Jesus conveyed to people that their concerns mat-

tered to him. For instance, consider the ?rst miracle
Jesus performed. He was attending a wedding feast
in Cana, a town in Galilee. An embarrassing problem arose—the wine ran out! Jesus’ mother, Mary,
told her son what had happened. And what did Jesus
do? He had the attendants ?ll up six large stone jars
with water. When a sample was taken to the direc14-16. (a) What circumstances led Jesus to perform his ?rst miracle,
and why was it a marvelous deed? (b) What does Jesus’ miracle in Cana
reveal about him, providing what lesson for parents?
194

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

tor of the feast, why, it was ?ne wine! Was that a
trick, some sleight of hand? No, the water “had been
turned into wine.” (John 2:1-11) Turning one thing
into another has long been a dream of humans. For
centuries, men called alchemists tried to turn lead
into gold. They never succeeded—although lead and
gold are, in fact, remarkably similar elements.1 What
about water and wine? Chemically, water is simple,
a combination of two basic elements. Wine, on the
other hand, contains nearly a thousand components,
many of them complex compounds! Why would Jesus perform such a marvelous deed in answer to
something as trivial as a shortage of wine at a wedding feast?
15

The problem was not trivial to the bride and

groom. In the ancient Middle East, hospitality to
invited guests was of profound importance. Running out of wine at the wedding feast would have
caused the bride and groom considerable shame and
1 Students of chemistry know that lead and gold are quite close on
the periodic table of elements. An atom of lead simply has three
more protons in its nucleus than gold has. Modern-day physicists
have even converted small amounts of lead into gold, but the process
requires so much energy that it is not cost-e?ective.
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

195

embarrassment, casting a pall over their wedding day
and their memories of it in the years that followed.
The problem mattered to them, and it mattered to
Jesus. So he did something about it. Can you see why
people would approach him with their concerns?
16

Again, parents may ?nd a useful lesson here.

What if your child approaches you, weighed down
with some problem? You may be tempted to dismiss
his concern as something trivial. You may even be
tempted to laugh about it. Compared to your own
burdens, the child’s problem may indeed seem insigni?cant. Remember, though, that it is not trivial to
the child! If it matters to one you love so dearly,
should it not matter to you as well? Conveying to
your child that you care about his concerns will
make you an approachable parent.
17

As we discussed in Chapter 3, Jesus was mild

and humble. (Matthew 11:29) Mildness is a beautiful
quality, powerful proof of the humility in a person’s
heart. It is part of the fruitage of God’s holy spirit
and is associated with godly wisdom. (Galatians 5:
17. Jesus set what example of mildness, and why is this quality an evidence of strength?
196

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

22, 23; James 3:13) Even under the worst provocation, Jesus maintained control of himself. His mildness was anything but weakness. One scholar said
of this quality: “Behind the gentleness there is the
strength of steel.” Indeed, it often takes strength for
us to restrain our temper and treat others with mildness. But with Jehovah blessing our e?orts, we can
imitate Jesus in showing mildness, and that will
make us more approachable.
18

Jesus was reasonable. When Jesus was in Tyre, a

woman came to him because her daughter was “badly demonized.” In three di?erent ways, Jesus indicated that he was not inclined to do what she wanted.
First, he responded with silence; second, he gave her
a reason why he should not do as she asked; third,
he gave an illustration that made the point even
clearer. Yet, was his manner cold, unyielding? Did he
imply that she was on dangerous ground in daring to
counter the words of so great a man? No, this woman clearly felt safe. She not only asked for help but
18. What example reveals Jesus’ reasonableness, and why do you think
this quality would make a person approachable?
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

197

persisted even in the face of his apparent unwillingness to help her. Jesus saw the remarkable faith that
moved her to persist, and he healed her daughter.
(Matthew 15:22-28) Surely Jesus’ reasonableness, his
willingness to listen and to yield when appropriate,
made people eager to approach him!
Are You Approachable?
19 People like to think of themselves as being approachable. Some in positions of authority, for instance, are fond of saying that they have an opendoor policy, that their subordinates are always free
to approach them. The Bible, however, contains this
powerful caution: “A multitude of men will proclaim
each one his own loving-kindness, but a faithful man
who can ?nd?” (Proverbs 20:6) It is easy to say that
we are approachable, but are we truly faithful in imitating this aspect of Jesus’ love? The answer may lie,
not in how we see ourselves, but in how others
see us. Paul said: “Let your reasonableness become
known to all men.” (Philippians 4:5) Each of us does
well to ask: ‘How am I perceived by others? What is
my reputation?’
19. How can we tell if we are truly approachable?
198

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

20

Christian elders in particular strive to be ap-

proachable. They earnestly desire to live up to the
description recorded at Isaiah 32:1, 2: “Each one
must prove to be like a hiding place from the wind
and a place of concealment from the rainstorm, like
streams of water in a waterless country, like the
shadow of a heavy crag in an exhausted land.” An elder can provide such protection, refreshment, and
relief only if he remains approachable. Granted, doing so is not always easy, for elders bear a heavy load
of responsibility in these di?cult times. Still, elders
strive never to appear too busy to care for the needs
of Jehovah’s sheep. (1 Peter 5:2) Other members of
the congregation try to be reasonable in what they
expect of such faithful men, showing a humble and
cooperative spirit.—Hebrews 13:17.
21

Parents seek to be ever available to their chil-

dren. So much is at stake! They want their children
20. (a) Why is it important for Christian elders to be approachable?
(b) Why should we be reasonable in what we expect of elders in the congregation?
21. How can parents remain accessible to their children, and what will
we consider in the next chapter?
“GREAT CROWDS APPROACHED HIM”

199

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

Why might our asking questions and listening
carefully to answers move people to approach us?
—Matthew 16:13-17.

?

How did Jesus prove to be approachable even
when his privacy was interrupted, and how might
we follow his example?—Mark 6:31-34.

?

How did Jesus view nonbelievers, and how will
imitating his balanced view make us approachable?
—Luke 5:29-32.

?

In what way will imitating Jesus’ positive view
of people help us to become more approachable?
—John 1:47.

to know that it is safe to con?de in Father or Mother. Thus, Christian parents are careful to be mild
and reasonable, not overreacting when a child confesses to a mistake or displays some faulty thinking.
As parents patiently train their children, they strive
to keep the lines of communication open. Really, all
of us want to remain approachable, as Jesus was.
In the next chapter, we will discuss Jesus’ heartfelt compassion—one of the principal qualities that
made him approachable.
200

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

CHAPTER

15

“Moved With Pity”
TWO blind men are sitting beside the road, just outside Jericho. They come there each day, ?nd a place
where crowds are likely to pass, and publicly ask for
charity. This day, however, they are about to experience something that will dramatically change their
life.
2

Suddenly, the beggars hear a commotion. Unable

to see what is going on, one of them asks what the
excitement is about, and he is told: “Jesus the Nazarene is passing by!” Jesus is on his way to Jerusalem
for the last time. But he is not alone; large crowds
are following him. Upon hearing who is passing by,
the beggars cause something of an uproar by shouting: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!” Annoyed, the crowds tell the beggars to be quiet, but
the men are desperate. They will not be silenced.
3

Jesus hears their shouting above the din of the

1-3. (a) How does Jesus respond when two blind beggars plead with him
for help? (b) What is meant by the expression “moved with pity”? (See
footnote.)
“MOVED WITH PITY”

201

crowd. What will he do? There is much weighing on
his mind and heart. He is about to enter the ?nal
week of his earthly life. He knows that su?ering and
a cruel death await him at Jerusalem. Still, he does
not ignore the insistent cries. He stops and asks that
the ones doing the shouting be brought to him.
“Lord, let our eyes be opened,” they plead. “Moved
with pity,” Jesus touches their eyes, and they recover sight.1 Without delay, they begin to follow Jesus.
—Luke 18:35-43; Matthew 20:29-34.
4

This was no isolated case. On many occasions

and under many di?erent circumstances, Jesus was
deeply moved to show compassion. Bible prophecy
foretold that he would “feel sorry for the lowly one.”
(Psalm 72:13) True to those words, Jesus was sensitive to the feelings of others. He took the initiative
to help people. His compassion was a motivating
force in his preaching. Let us see how the Gospels
1 The Greek word rendered “moved with pity” has been called one
of the strongest words in Greek for the feeling of compassion. One
reference work notes that this word indicates “not only a pained feeling at [the] sight of su?ering, but in addition a strong desire to relieve
and to remove the su?ering.”

4. How did Jesus ful?ll the prophecy that he would “feel sorry for the
lowly one”?
202

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

reveal the tender compassion behind Jesus’ words
and actions and consider how we can show similar
compassion.
5

Consideration for the Feelings of Others
Jesus was a man of deep empathy. He identi?ed

with and shared in the feelings of those who were
su?ering. Even though he did not share all their circumstances, he truly felt their pain in his heart. (Hebrews 4:15) When healing a woman who had su?ered
from a ?ow of blood for 12 years, he described her
ailment as a “grievous sickness,” thus acknowledging
that it had caused her great distress and su?ering. (Mark 5:25-34) When he saw Mary and those
with her weeping over the death of Lazarus, he was
so deeply touched by their sorrow that he became
inwardly agitated. Although he knew that he was
about to resurrect Lazarus, Jesus was so moved that
his eyes brimmed with tears.—John 11:33, 35.
6

On another occasion, a leper approached Jesus

and pleaded: “If you just want to, you can make me
clean.” How did Jesus, a perfect man who had never
5, 6. What examples show that Jesus was a man of empathy?
“MOVED WITH PITY”

203

been sick, respond? His heart went out to the leper.
Indeed, “he was moved with pity.” (Mark 1:40-42) He
then did something extraordinary. He well knew that
lepers were unclean under the Law and were not to
mingle with others. (Leviticus 13:45, 46) Jesus was
certainly capable of healing this man without any
physical contact. (Matthew 8:5-13) Yet, he chose to
reach out and touch the leper, saying: “I want to.
Be made clean.” Immediately the leprosy vanished.
What tender empathy Jesus expressed!
7

As Christians, we are called on to imitate Jesus

in showing empathy. The Bible urges us to show “fellow feeling.”1 (1 Peter 3:8) It may not be easy to
grasp the feelings of those su?ering from chronic illness or depression—especially if we have not gone
through such pain ourselves. Remember, though,
that empathy does not depend on shared circumstances. Jesus empathized with the sick even though
he himself had never been sick. How, then, can we
1 The Greek adjective rendered “fellow feeling” literally means “suffering with.”

7. What can help us to cultivate empathy, and how may this quality be
expressed?
204

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

cultivate empathy? By patiently listening as su?ering ones open up their hearts and share their feelings. We might ask ourselves, ‘If I were in their situation, how would I feel?’ (1 Corinthians 12:26) If we
sharpen our sensitivity to the feelings of others, we
will be better able to “speak consolingly to the depressed souls.” (1 Thessalonians 5:14) At times, empathy may be expressed not only with words but also
with tears. “Weep with people who weep,” says Romans 12:15.
8

Jesus was considerate of others, and he acted in

ways that spared their feelings. Recall the time when
a man who was deaf and hardly able to speak was
brought to Jesus. Evidently sensing some uneasiness
in this man, Jesus did something that he did not ordinarily do when healing others: “He took [the man]
away from the crowd.” In private and free from the
stares of the crowd, he healed the man.—Mark 7:
31-35.
9

Jesus acted with similar consideration when peo-

ple brought him a blind man and asked that he be
8, 9. How did Jesus show consideration for the feelings of others?
“MOVED WITH PITY”

205

healed. Jesus “took the blind man by the hand”
and “brought him outside the village.” He then
healed the man in stages. This perhaps allowed the
man’s brain and eyes to adjust gradually to the dazzling sights and complexities of the sunlit world
around him. (Mark 8:22-26) What consideration Jesus showed!
10 Being followers of Jesus calls on us to show consideration for the feelings of others. We are thus
mindful of our speech, remembering that thoughtless use of the tongue can hurt the feelings of others. (Proverbs 12:18; 18:21) Harsh words, disparaging
remarks, and biting sarcasm have no place among
Christians, who are sensitive to the feelings of other
people. (Ephesians 4:31) Elders, how can you show
consideration for the feelings of others? When giving counsel, cushion your words with kindness, allowing the listener to keep his dignity. (Galatians
6:1) Parents, how can you be considerate of your
children’s feelings? When administering discipline,
endeavor to do so in ways that spare your children
needless embarrassment.—Colossians 3:21.
10. In what ways can we show consideration for the feelings of others?
206

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

11

Taking the Initiative to Help Others
Jesus did not always have to be asked before he

showed compassion to others. After all, compassion
is, not a passive quality, but an active, positive one.
Not surprisingly, then, tender compassion moved Jesus to take the initiative in helping others. For example, when a large crowd stayed with him for three
days, going without food, no one had to tell Jesus
that the people were hungry or suggest that he do
something about it. The account says: “Jesus called
his disciples to him and said: ‘I feel pity for the
crowd, because it is already three days that they have
stayed with me and they have nothing to eat; and I
do not want to send them away fasting. They may
possibly give out on the road.’ ” Then, entirely of his
own volition, he fed the crowd miraculously.—Matthew 15:32-38.
12

Consider another account. In 31 C.E., as Je-

sus neared the city of Nain, he came across a sad
scene. A funeral procession was leaving the city, perhaps heading for nearby hillside tombs, to bury “the
11, 12. What Bible accounts show that Jesus did not have to be asked
before he displayed compassion to others?
“MOVED WITH PITY”

207

only-begotten son of . . . a widow.” Can you imagine
the pain in that mother’s heart? She was about to
bury her only son, and she had no husband to share
her grief. Of all the people in the procession, Jesus
“caught sight of” the now childless widow. What he
saw touched him—yes, “he was moved with pity for
her.” No one had to implore him. The compassion
in his heart impelled him to take the initiative. So
“he approached and touched the bier,” and then he
restored the young man to life. What happened next?
Jesus did not ask the young man to join the large
crowd traveling with Him. Instead, Jesus “gave him
to his mother,” making them a family again and ensuring that the widow would be cared for.—Luke 7:
11-15.
13

How can we follow Jesus’ example? Of course,

we cannot provide food miraculously or restore the
dead to life. We can, however, imitate Jesus in taking the initiative to help those in need. A fellow believer may su?er a severe ?nancial reversal or lose
his job. (1 John 3:17) The home of a widow may be
13. How can we imitate Jesus in taking the appropriate initiative to help
those in need?
208

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

in urgent need of repair. (James 1:27) We may know
of a bereaved family that needs comfort or some
practical aid. (1 Thessalonians 5:11) In cases of genuine need, we do not have to wait to be asked before
o?ering some help. (Proverbs 3:27) Compassion will
move us to take appropriate initiative to assist, as
our circumstances allow. Never forget that a simple
act of kindness or a few words of comfort spoken
from the heart can be powerful expressions of compassion.—Colossians 3:12.
14

Compassion Moved Him to Preach
As we saw in Section 2 of this book, Jesus set an

outstanding example in preaching the good news. He
said: “I must declare the good news of the kingdom
of God, because for this I was sent forth.” (Luke 4:
43) Why did he give priority to this work? Primarily
because of his love for God. But Jesus had another
motive: Heartfelt compassion moved him to respond
to the spiritual needs of others. Of all the ways that
he showed compassion, none were more important
than satisfying the spiritual hunger of others. Let us
14. Why did Jesus give priority to the work of preaching the good news?
“MOVED WITH PITY”

209

examine two incidents that reveal how Jesus viewed
the people to whom he preached. Such a consideration can help us to analyze our own motives for
sharing in the public ministry.
15

In 31 C.E., after about two years of exerting him-

self vigorously in the ministry, Jesus expanded his
e?orts by embarking “on a tour of all the cities and
villages” of Galilee. What he saw touched his heart.
The apostle Matthew reports: “On seeing the crowds
he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and
thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matthew 9:35, 36) Jesus felt for the common people. He
was keenly aware of their miserable spiritual condition. He knew that they were mistreated and utterly
neglected by the very ones who should have been
shepherding them—the religious leaders. Motivated
by deep compassion, Jesus worked hard to reach the
people with a message of hope. There was nothing
they needed more than the good news of God’s Kingdom.
16

S omething similar happ ene d a numb er of

15, 16. Describe two incidents that reveal how Jesus viewed the people
to whom he preached.
210

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

months later, near Passover time in 32 C.E. On this
occasion, Jesus and his apostles boarded a boat and
sailed across the Sea of Galilee in search of a quiet
place to rest. But a crowd of people ran along the
shore and arrived on the other side ahead of the
boat. How did Jesus react? “On getting out, he saw
a great crowd, but he was moved with pity for them,
because they were as sheep without a shepherd. And
he started to teach them many things.” (Mark 6:3134) Again, Jesus was “moved with pity” because
of the poor spiritual condition of the people. Like
“sheep without a shepherd,” they were starving spiritually and left to fend for themselves. Compassion
rather than a mere sense of duty motivated Jesus to
preach.
17

What motivates us as followers of Jesus to share

in the ministry? As we saw in Chapter 9 of this book,
we have a commission, a responsibility, to preach
and to make disciples. (Matthew 28:19, 20; 1 Corinthians 9:16) But our motive for sharing in this work
must go beyond a mere sense of duty or obligation.
17, 18. (a) What motivates us to share in the ministry? (b) How can we
cultivate compassion for others?
“MOVED WITH PITY”

211

Above all, love for Jehovah moves us to preach the
good news of his Kingdom. Our preaching is also
motivated by compassion for those who do not share
our beliefs. (Mark 12:28-31) How, then, can we cultivate compassion for others?
18

We need to see p eople as Jesus saw them

—“skinned and thrown about like sheep without a
shepherd.” Imagine ?nding a lamb that is hopelessly lost. Without a shepherd to lead it to green pastures and water, the poor creature is starving and
thirsty. Would not your heart go out to that lamb?
Would you not do your best to give it some food and
drink? That lamb is like many people who do not yet
know the good news. Neglected by false religious
shepherds, they are starving and thirsting spiritually and without a real hope for the future. We have
what they need: the nourishing spiritual food and refreshing waters of truth found in God’s Word. (Isaiah 55:1, 2) When we re?ect on the spiritual needs of
those around us, our heart goes out to them. If, like
Jesus, we feel deeply for people, we will do all we
can to share the Kingdom hope with them.
212

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How can we help others to follow Jesus’ example? Suppose we want to encourage a Bible student
who quali?es to begin sharing in the public preaching work. Or perhaps we want to help an inactive
one to have a full share in the ministry again. How
can we assist such ones? We need to appeal to their
heart. Recall that ?rst Jesus was “moved with pity”
for people, and then he taught them. (Mark 6:34) So
if we can help them to cultivate compassion, their
hearts may well move them to be like Jesus and share
the good news with others. We might ask them:
“How has accepting the Kingdom message changed
your life for the better? What about people who do
not yet know this message—do they not also need
the good news? What can you do to help them?” Of
course, the strongest motivation for sharing in the
ministry is love for God and a desire to serve him.
20 Being a follower of Jesus involves more than just
repeating his words and copying his deeds. We need
to cultivate the same “mental attitude” that he had.
19

19. What might we do to help motivate a Bible student who quali?es to
share in the public ministry?
20. (a) What is involved in being a follower of Jesus? (b) What will be
considered in the next chapter?
“MOVED WITH PITY”

213

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

In what way did Jesus show compassion in the
way he exercised authority, and how can we imitate
him?—Matthew 11:28-30.

?

Why is it important that we follow Jesus’ example
in showing mercy, or compassion, to others?
—Matthew 9:9-13; 23:23.

?

What actions of Jesus demonstrated that he
understood the feelings of others, and how can we
follow his example?—Luke 7:36-50.

?

How does the parable of the neighborly
Samaritan show that compassion is a positive
quality, and in what way can we apply the point of
the story?—Luke 10:29-37.

(Philippians 2:5) How thankful we can be, then, that
the Bible reveals to us the thoughts and feelings behind Jesus’ words and actions! By becoming familiar
with “the mind of Christ,” we will be better able to
cultivate sensitivity and heartfelt compassion and
thus treat others the way Jesus treated people in general. (1 Corinthians 2:16) In the next chapter, we will
consider the various ways that Jesus showed love for
his followers in particular.
214

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

CHAPTER

16

“Jesus . . . Loved Them
to the End”
AS HE gathers his apostles in an upper room of a
house in Jerusalem, Jesus knows that this is his last
evening with them. The time is near for him to return to his Father. In a matter of hours, Jesus will
be arrested and his faith tested as never before. Yet,
not even his impending death can distract him from
the needs of the apostles.
2 Jesus has prepared the apostles for his departure,
but he still has more to say to strengthen them for
what lies ahead. So he spends these last precious moments teaching them vital lessons that will help
them to remain faithful. His words are among the
warmest and most intimate that he has ever shared
with them. Why, though, is Jesus more concerned
about his apostles than about himself? Why are
these ?nal hours with them so dear to him? The answer is, in a word, love. His love for them is profound.
1, 2. How does Jesus spend his last evening with his apostles, and why
are these ?nal moments precious to him?
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

215

3

Decades later when introducing his inspired ac-

count of the events of that evening, the apostle John
wrote: “Because he knew before the festival of the
passover that his hour had come for him to move out
of this world to the Father, Jesus, having loved his
own that were in the world, loved them to the end.”
(John 13:1) Jesus did not wait until that night to
demonstrate love to “his own.” Throughout his ministry, in ways large and small, he gave proof of his
love for his disciples. We do well to examine some
of the ways he showed his love, for by imitating him
in this regard, we prove ourselves his genuine disciples.
4

Showing Patience
Love and patience go together. “Love is long-

su?ering,” observes 1 Corinthians 13:4, and longsu?ering involves patiently putting up with others.
Did Jesus need patience in dealing with his disci3. How do we know that Jesus did not wait until his ?nal evening to
show love to his followers?
4, 5. (a) Why did Jesus need patience in dealing with his disciples?
(b) How did Jesus respond when three of his apostles showed a lack of
vigilance in the garden of Gethsemane?
216

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ples? Indeed, he did! As we saw in Chapter 3, the
apostles were slow to cultivate humility. More than
once, they got into arguments about who was the
greatest among them. How did Jesus react? Did he
get angry and respond with irritation or resentment?
No, he patiently reasoned with them, even when “a
heated dispute” over this issue arose on his last evening with them!—Luke 22:24-30; Matthew 20:20-28;
Mark 9:33-37.
5

Later on that ?nal night, when Jesus went to the

garden of Gethsemane with the 11 faithful apostles,
his patience was tested yet again. Leaving eight of
the apostles, Jesus took Peter, James, and John deeper into the garden. “My soul is deeply grieved, even
to death,” Jesus told them. “Stay here and keep on
the watch.” He went a short distance away and began praying fervently. After praying at length, he returned to the three apostles. What did he ?nd? In
this, his hour of greatest trial, they were fast asleep!
Did he berate them for their lack of vigilance? No,
he patiently exhorted them. His kind words showed
an understanding of the stress they had been under
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

217

and of their weaknesses.1 “The spirit, of course, is
eager,” he said, “but the ?esh is weak.” Jesus remained patient that evening, even when he came and
found them asleep not one but two more times!
—Matthew 26:36-46.
6

It is encouraging to note that Jesus did not give

up on his apostles. His patience eventually bore
fruit, for these faithful men learned the importance
of being both humble and vigilant. (1 Peter 3:8; 4:7)
How can we imitate Jesus in our dealings with others? Elders especially need to exercise patience. Fellow believers may approach an elder with their problems when the elder himself is tired out or distracted
by his own concerns. At times, those in need of help
may be slow to respond to counsel. Nevertheless, patient elders will instruct “with mildness” and will
“treat the ?ock with tenderness.” (2 Timothy 2:24,
25; Acts 20:28, 29) Parents also do well to imitate Jesus in showing patience, for at times children may
1 The apostles’ sleepiness was induced by more than physical tiredness. The parallel account at Luke 22:45 says that Jesus “found them
slumbering from grief.”

6. How can we imitate Jesus in our dealings with others?
218

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

be slow to respond to counsel or correction. Love
and patience will help parents not to give up in their
e?orts to train their children. The rewards of such
patience can be great indeed.—Psalm 127:3.
7

Caring for Their Needs
Love is evidenced by unsel?sh deeds. (1 John 3:

17, 18) It “does not look for its own interests.” (1 Corinthians 13:5) Love moved Jesus to care for the
physical and material needs of his disciples. He often acted in their behalf even before they voiced
their needs. When he saw that they were tired, he
suggested that they accompany him “privately into
a lonely place and rest up a bit.” (Mark 6:31) When
he sensed that they were hungry, he took the initiative to feed them—along with thousands of others
who had come to hear him teach.—Matthew 14:19,
20; 15:35-37.
8

Jesus recognized the spiritual needs of his disci-

ples and provided for them. (Matthew 4:4; 5:3) In his
7. In what ways did Jesus care for the physical and material needs of
his disciples?
8, 9. (a) What indicates that Jesus recognized the spiritual needs of
his disciples and provided for them? (b) When on the stake, how did Jesus show his deep concern for the welfare of his mother?
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

219

teaching, he often gave them special attention. The
Sermon on the Mount was delivered especially for
the bene?t of his disciples. (Matthew 5:1, 2, 13-16)
When he taught with illustrations, “privately to his
disciples he would explain all things.” (Mark 4:34)
Jesus foretold that he would appoint a “faithful and
discreet slave” to ensure that His followers would be
well-fed spiritually during the last days. This faithful slave, composed of a small group of Jesus’ spiritanointed brothers on earth, has been providing spiritual “food at the proper time” ever since 1919 C.E.
—Matthew 24:45.
9

On the day of his death, Jesus showed in a touch-

ing way his concern for the spiritual welfare of his
loved ones. Picture the scene. Jesus was on the stake,
su?ering excruciating pain. In order to draw breath,
he evidently had to push himself up with his feet.
This no doubt caused him severe pain as the weight
of his body tore at the nail wounds in his feet and
his scourged back rubbed against the stake. Speech,
which involves breath control, must have been dif?cult and painful. Yet, just before he died, Jesus
220

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

spoke words that showed his deep love for his mother, Mary. Seeing Mary and the apostle John standing nearby, Jesus, in a voice loud enough for bystanders to hear, said to his mother: “Woman, see!
Your son!” Then to John, he said: “See! Your mother!” (John 19:26, 27) Jesus knew that the faithful
apostle would care not just for Mary’s physical and
material needs but also for her spiritual welfare.1
10

Caring parents ?nd it bene?cial to re?ect on Je-

sus’ example. A father who truly loves his family will
provide for them materially. (1 Timothy 5:8) Balanced, loving family heads make time for occasional rest and recreation. More important, Christian
parents provide for their children’s spiritual needs.
How? Such parents arrange for a regular family Bible study, and they endeavor to make these study sessions upbuilding and enjoyable for their children.
(Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) By word and example, the parents teach their children that the ministry is an
1 Mary was apparently a widow by then, and her other children were
evidently not yet disciples of Jesus.—John 7:5.

10. How can parents imitate Jesus as they care for the needs of their
children?
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

221

important activity and that preparing for and attending Christian meetings is an essential part of their
spiritual routine.—Hebrews 10:24, 25.
11

Willing to Forgive
Forgiveness is a facet of love. (Colossians 3:13,

14) Love “does not keep account of the injury,”
states 1 Corinthians 13:5. On a number of occasions,
Jesus taught his followers the importance of forgiveness. He urged them to forgive others “not, Up to
seven times, but, Up to seventy-seven times”—that
is, an unlimited number of times. (Matthew 18:21,
22) He taught them that a sinner should be forgiven
if upon being rebuked, he shows repentance. (Luke
17:3, 4) Jesus, however, was not like the hypocritical
Pharisees, who taught by word only; he also taught
by example. (Matthew 23:2-4) Let us see how Jesus
demonstrated his willingness to forgive even when a
trusted friend let him down.
12

Jesus had a close relationship with the apostle

11. What did Jesus teach his followers about forgiveness?
12, 13. (a) In what way did Peter let Jesus down on the night of His
arrest? (b) How did Jesus’ actions after his resurrection make it clear
that he did more than just preach forgiveness?
222

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Peter, a warmhearted man who at times was impulsive. Jesus recognized the good qualities of Peter
and extended special privileges to him. Peter, along
with James and John, personally witnessed certain
miracles that the rest of the 12 did not get to see.
(Matthew 17:1, 2; Luke 8:49-55) As we noted earlier,
Peter was one of the apostles who accompanied Jesus farther into the garden of Gethsemane on the
night of His arrest. Yet, that same night when Jesus
was betrayed and taken into custody, Peter and the
other apostles abandoned Jesus and ?ed. Later, Peter proved brave enough to stand outside while Jesus
was illegally tried. Still, Peter then became fearful
and made a serious mistake—three times he lyingly
denied that he even knew Jesus! (Matthew 26:69-75)
How did Jesus react? How would you have responded if a close friend let you down in such a way?
13

Jesus was prepared to forgive Peter. He knew

that Peter was crushed by the weight of his sin. After all, the repentant apostle “broke down and gave
way to weeping.” (Mark 14:72) On the day of His resurrection, Jesus appeared to Peter, likely to comfort
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

223

and reassure the apostle. (Luke 24:34; 1 Corinthians
15:5) Less than two months later, Jesus digni?ed Peter by letting him take the lead in giving a witness to
the crowds in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
(Acts 2:14-40) Let us remember, too, that Jesus did
not hold a grudge against the apostles as a group for
abandoning him. On the contrary, after his resurrection, he still called them “my brothers.” (Matthew
28:10) Is it not clear that Jesus did more than just
preach forgiveness?
14

As disciples of Christ, we need to learn to for-

give others. Why? Unlike Jesus, we are imperfect
—as are those who may sin against us. From time to
time, we all stumble in word and in deed. (Romans
3:23; James 3:2) By forgiving others when there is a
basis for mercy, we clear the way for our own sins to
be forgiven by God. (Mark 11:25) How, then, can we
demonstrate a readiness to forgive those who may
sin against us? In many cases, love helps us to overlook the minor sins and shortcomings of others.
(1 Peter 4:8) When those who have wronged us are
14. Why do we need to learn to forgive others, and how can we demonstrate a readiness to forgive?
224

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

sincerely repentant, as Peter was, surely we want to
imitate Jesus’ willingness to forgive. Rather than
holding a grudge, we wisely choose to let go of resentment. (Ephesians 4:32) By doing so, we contribute to the peace of the congregation as well as to our
own peace of mind and heart.—1 Peter 3:11.
15

Demonstrating His Trust
Love and trust go hand in hand. Love “believes

all things.”1 (1 Corinthians 13:7) Moved by love, Jesus demonstrated a willingness to trust his disciples
despite their imperfections. He had con?dence in
them and believed that at heart they really loved Jehovah and wanted to do His will. Even when they
made mistakes, Jesus did not question their motives.
For example, when the apostles James and John evidently got their mother to request that they sit
beside Jesus in his Kingdom, Jesus did not doubt
their loyalty or dismiss them as apostles.—Matthew
20:20-28.
1 This, of course, does not mean that love is gullible or naive. It
means, rather, that love is not unduly critical or suspicious. Love refrains from hastily judging the motives of others or concluding the
worst about them.

15. Why did Jesus trust his disciples despite their shortcomings?
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

225

Demonstrating his trust, Jesus delegated various
responsibilities to his disciples. On the two occasions when he miraculously multiplied food and fed
the crowds, he delegated to his disciples the responsibility of distributing the food. (Matthew 14:19; 15:
36) In preparation for his ?nal Passover, he assigned
Peter and John to go to Jerusalem and get things
ready. They took care of obtaining the lamb, wine,
unleavened bread, bitter greens, and any other necessary items. This was no menial assignment, for celebrating the Passover in the proper manner was a requirement of the Mosaic Law, and Jesus had to live
up to that Law. Besides, later that evening Jesus used
the wine and the unleavened bread as important
symbols when instituting the Memorial of his death.
—Matthew 26:17-19; Luke 22:8, 13.
17 Jesus saw ?t to entrust his disciples with even
weightier responsibilities. As we noted earlier, he delegated to a small group of his anointed followers on
earth the important responsibility of dispensing spiritual food. (Luke 12:42-44) Recall, too, that he placed
in the hands of his disciples the weighty commission
16

16, 17. What responsibilities did Jesus delegate to his disciples?
226

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

to preach and make disciples. (Matthew 28:18-20)
Even now, though invisible and ruling from heaven,
Jesus entrusts his congregation on earth to the care
of spiritually quali?ed “gifts in men.”—Ephesians 4:
8, 11, 12.
18 How can we follow Jesus’ example in our dealings with others? Our showing trust and con?dence
in fellow believers is an expression of our love. Let
us remember that love is positive, not negative.
When others disappoint us, which is bound to happen from time to time, love will keep us from quickly assuming that their motives are bad. (Matthew 7:
1, 2) If we keep a positive view of our fellow believers, we will treat them in ways that build up rather
than tear down.—1 Thessalonians 5:11.
19 Can we imitate Jesus’ willingness to delegate? It
is bene?cial for those who have positions of responsibility in the congregation to delegate appropriate
and meaningful tasks to others, trusting them to
do their best. Experienced elders can thereby provide necessary and valuable training for quali?ed
18-20. (a) How can we show trust and confidence in fellow believers?
(b) How can we imitate Jesus’ willingness to delegate? (c) What will be
discussed in the next chapter?
“JESUS . . . LOVED THEM TO THE END”

227

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

Why is it important for us to heed Jesus’ counsel
about forgiveness?—Matthew 6:14, 15.

?

How can we apply the point of Jesus’
illustration about the need for us to be forgiving?
—Matthew 18:23-35.

?

How did Jesus show consideration for his
disciples, and how can we imitate him?
—Matthew 20:17-19; John 16:12.

?

How did Jesus let Peter know that He had
con?dence in him, and how can we express
con?dence in others?—Luke 22:31, 32.

younger men who are “reaching out” to help in
the congregation. (1 Timothy 3:1; 2 Timothy 2:2)
This training is vital. As Jehovah continues to speed
up Kingdom growth, quali?ed men will need to be
trained to care for the increase.—Isaiah 60:22.
20 Jesus provided us with a marvelous example in
showing love to others. Of all the ways that we can
follow him, imitating his love is the most important.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the greatest expression of his love for us—his willingness to give
his life.
228

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

CHAPTER

17

“No One Has Love
Greater Than This”
“LOOK! The man!” With those words, the Roman
Governor Pontius Pilate presents Jesus Christ to the
angry mob gathered outside the governor’s palace at
dawn on Passover of 33 C.E. (John 19:5) Just a few
days earlier, Jesus was hailed by the crowds when he
made his triumphal entry into Jerusalem as the divinely appointed King. On this night, however, the
hostile crowd has a very di?erent view of him.
2 Jesus is decked with a purple robe like that worn
by royalty, and he has a crown upon his head. But
the robe, draped over the ribbons of bleeding ?esh
on his scourged back, and the crown, braided of
thorns and pressed into his now-bloodied scalp, are
in mockery of his royal status. The people, incited
by the chief priests, reject the battered man standing before them. The priests shout: “Impale him! Impale him!” With murder in their hearts, the people
cry out: “He ought to die.”—John 19:1-7.
1-4. (a) What happens when Pilate presents Jesus to the angry mob
gathered outside the governor’s palace? (b) How does Jesus respond to
the humiliation and su?ering, and what important questions are raised?
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

229

With dignity and courage, Jesus endures the humiliation and su?ering uncomplainingly.1 He is fully prepared to die. Later that Passover Day, he willingly submits to a painful death on a torture stake.
—John 19:17, 18, 30.
3

By surrendering his life, Jesus proved himself a
real friend to his followers. “No one has love greater than this,” he said, “that someone should surrender his soul in behalf of his friends.” (John 15:13)
That raises some important questions. Was it really
necessary for Jesus to go through all that su?ering
and then to die? Why was he willing to do so? As “his
friends” and followers, how can we imitate his example?
4

Why Was It Necessary for Jesus
to Su?er and Die?
5 As the promised Messiah, Jesus knew what to expect. He was aware of the many prophecies in the
Hebrew Scriptures that foretold in detail the Messi1 Twice that day Jesus was spit upon, ?rst by the religious leaders
and then by the Roman soldiers. (Matthew 26:59-68; 27:27-30) Even
this contemptuous treatment, he took without complaining, ful?lling the prophetic words: “My face I did not conceal from humiliating
things and spit.”—Isaiah 50:6.

5. How did Jesus know the speci?c trials that awaited him?
230

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ah’s su?ering and death. (Isaiah 53:3-7, 12; Daniel 9:
26) More than once, he prepared his disciples for the
trials that awaited him. (Mark 8:31; 9:31) On the way
to Jerusalem for his ?nal Passover, he speci?cally
told his apostles: “The Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes, and they
will condemn him to death and will deliver him to
men of the nations, and they will make fun of him
and will spit upon him and scourge him and kill
him.” (Mark 10:33, 34) These were no empty words.
As we have seen, Jesus was indeed made fun of, spit
upon, scourged, and killed.
6 Why, though, was it necessary for Jesus to su?er
and die? For several profoundly signi?cant reasons.
First, by keeping loyal, Jesus would prove his integrity and uphold Jehovah’s sovereignty. Recall that
Satan falsely claimed that humans serve God only
out of sel?sh interest. (Job 2:1-5) By remaining faithful “as far as death . . . on a torture stake,” Jesus gave
the most conclusive answer possible to Satan’s baseless charge. (Philippians 2:8; Proverbs 27:11) Second, the Messiah’s su?ering and death would provide atonement for the sins of others. (Isaiah 53:5,
6. Why was it necessary for Jesus to su?er and die?
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

231

10; Daniel 9:24) Jesus gave “his soul a ransom in exchange for many,” opening the way for us to have an
approved relationship with God. (Matthew 20:28)
Third, by enduring all manner of hardships and suffering, Jesus was “tested in all respects like ourselves.” He is thus a compassionate High Priest, one
who is able to “sympathize with our weaknesses.”
—Hebrews 2:17, 18; 4:15.
Why Was Jesus Willing to Give His Life?
7 To put into perspective what Jesus was willing to
do, think about this: What man would leave his family and home and move to a foreign land if he knew
that most of its inhabitants would reject him, that
he would be subjected to humiliation and su?ering,
and that he would ?nally be murdered? Consider
now what Jesus did. Before coming to earth, he had
a favored position in the heavens alongside his Father. Yet, Jesus willingly left his heavenly home and
came to earth as a human. He made this move, knowing that he would be rejected by the majority and
that he would be subjected to cruel humiliation, intense su?ering, and a painful death. (Philippians 2:
5-7) What motivated Jesus to make such a sacri?ce?
7. How much did Jesus give up when he came to earth?
232

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Above all, Jesus was impelled by deep love for his
Father. Jesus’ endurance was evidence of his love for
Jehovah. That love caused Jesus to be concerned
about his Father’s name and reputation. (Matthew
6:9; John 17:1-6, 26) More than anything, Jesus wanted to see his Father’s name cleared of the reproach
that had been heaped upon it. Jesus thus counted it
the highest honor and privilege to su?er for righteousness’ sake, for he knew that his integrity would
play a part in sanctifying his Father’s good and beautiful name.—1 Chronicles 29:13.
8

Jesus had another motive for laying down his life
—love for humankind. This is a love that goes back
to the very beginning of human history. Long before
Jesus came to earth, the Bible reveals that he felt
this way: “The things I was fond of were with the
sons of men.” (Proverbs 8:30, 31) His love was clearly evident when he was on earth. As we saw in the
preceding three chapters of this book, in many ways
Jesus showed his love for humans in general and for
his followers in particular. But on Nisan 14, 33 C.E.,
he willingly gave his soul in our behalf. (John 10:11)
9

8, 9. What motivated Jesus to surrender his life?
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

233

Truly, there was no greater way for him to demonstrate his love for us. Are we to imitate him in this
regard? Yes. In fact, we are commanded to do so.
“Love One Another . . . as I Have Loved You”
10 The night before he died, Jesus told his closest
disciples: “I am giving you a new commandment,
that you love one another; just as I have loved you,
that you also love one another. By this all will know
that you are my disciples, if you have love among
yourselves.” (John 13:34, 35) “Love one another”
—why is that “a new commandment”? The Mosaic
Law had already commanded: “You must love your
fellow [or, neighbor] as yourself.” (Leviticus 19:18)
But the new commandment calls for a greater love,
a love that would move us to give our own life in behalf of others. Jesus himself made this clear when
he said: “This is my commandment, that you love
one another just as I have loved you. No one has love
greater than this, that someone should surrender his
soul in behalf of his friends.” (John 15:12, 13) The
new commandment, in e?ect, says: “Love others, not
10, 11. What is the new commandment that Jesus gave his followers,
what does it involve, and why is it important that we obey it?
234

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

as yourself, but more than yourself.” By his life and
death, Jesus certainly exempli?ed such love.
Why is it important that we obey the new commandment? Recall that Jesus said: “By this [selfsacri?cing love] all will know that you are my disciples.” Yes, self-sacri?cing love identi?es us as true
Christians. We might compare this love to an identi?cation badge. Delegates attending the annual conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses wear badge cards.
The card identi?es the wearer, showing his name and
congregation. Self-sacri?cing love for one another is
the “badge” that identi?es genuine Christians. In
other words, the love we show one another should
be so noticeable that it would serve as a sign, or
badge, telling observers that we are indeed true followers of Christ. Each of us does well to ask himself, ‘Is the “badge” of self-sacri?cing love evident in
my life?’
11

S elf-S acri?cing Love—What Does It Involve?
12 As followers of Jesus, we need to love one another as he loved us. This means being willing to
12, 13. (a) How far must we be willing to go to demonstrate our love
for one another? (b) What does it mean to be self-sacri?cing?
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

235

make sacri?ces for fellow believers. How far must we
be willing to go? The Bible tells us: “By this we have
come to know love, because that one surrendered his
soul for us; and we are under obligation to surrender
our souls for our brothers.” (1 John 3:16) Like Jesus,
we must be willing to die for one another if necessary. In times of persecution, we would rather sacri?ce our own life than betray our spiritual brothers
and thus endanger their lives. In lands divided by racial or ethnic strife, we would risk our own lives
to protect our brothers, regardless of their racial
or ethnic background. When nations go to war, we
would sooner face imprisonment or even death than
take up weapons against fellow believers—or anyone
else for that matter.—John 17:14, 16; 1 John 3:10-12.
Being willing to lay down our life for our brothers is not the only way to show self-sacri?cing love.
After all, few of us are ever called upon to make such
a great sacri?ce. However, if we love our brothers
enough to die for them, should we not be willing to
make smaller sacri?ces, going out of our way to help
them now? To be self-sacri?cing means to give up
our own advantage or comfort for the bene?t of oth13

236

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

ers. We put their needs and welfare ahead of our own
even if it is not convenient. (1 Corinthians 10:24)
In what practical ways can we show self-sacri?cing
love?
In the Congregation and in the Family
14 Congregation elders make many sacri?ces to
“shepherd the ?ock.” (1 Peter 5:2, 3) In addition to
looking after their own families, they may need to
take time during evenings or on weekends to care for
congregation matters, including preparing meeting
parts, making shepherding calls, and handling judicial cases. Many elders make additional sacri?ces,
working hard at assemblies and conventions and
serving as members of Hospital Liaison Committees, Patient Visitation Groups, and Regional Building Committees. Elders, never forget that by serving
with a willing spirit—spending your time, energy,
and resources shepherding the ?ock—you are showing self-sacri?cing love. (2 Corinthians 12:15) Your
unsel?sh e?orts are appreciated not only by Jehovah
but also by the congregation you shepherd.—Philippians 2:29; Hebrews 6:10.
14. (a) Elders are called upon to make what sacri?ces? (b) How do you
feel about the hardworking elders in your congregation?
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

237

What, though, about the wives of elders—do not
these supportive women also make sacri?ces so that
their husbands can take care of the ?ock? Surely it
is a sacri?ce for a wife when her husband needs to
devote to congregation matters time that he might
otherwise spend with his family. Think, too, of the
wives of traveling overseers and the sacri?ces they
make to accompany their husbands from congregation to congregation and from circuit to circuit.
They forgo having a home of their own and perhaps
have to sleep in a di?erent bed each week. Wives
who willingly put the interests of the congregation
ahead of their own are to be commended for their
generous expressions of self-sacri?cing love.—Philippians 2:3, 4.
16 How can we show self-sacri?cing love in the family? Parents, you make many sacri?ces to provide for
your children and to bring them up “in the discipline
and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4)
You may have to work long hours at exhausting jobs
just to put food on the table and to be sure that your
15

15. (a) What are some of the sacri?ces made by the wives of elders?
(b) How do you feel about the supportive wives who share their husbands
with your congregation?
16. Christian parents make what sacri?ces for their children?
238

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

children have adequate clothing and shelter. You
would rather do with less for yourself than see your
children deprived of life’s necessities. You also expend much e?ort to study with your children, take
them to Christian meetings, and work along with
them in the ?eld ministry. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7)
Your self-sacri?cing love pleases the Originator of
family life and may mean everlasting life for your
children.—Proverbs 22:6; Ephesians 3:14, 15.
17 Husbands, how can you imitate Jesus in showing
self-sacri?cing love? The Bible answers: “Husbands,
continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also
loved the congregation and delivered up himself for
it.” (Ephesians 5:25) As we have seen, Jesus loved his
followers so much that he died for them. A Christian
husband imitates the unsel?sh attitude of Jesus, who
“did not please himself.” (Romans 15:3) Such a husband willingly puts his wife’s needs and interests before his own. He does not rigidly insist on having his
own way, but he shows a willingness to yield when
there is no Scriptural issue involved. The husband who
shows self-sacri?cing love gains Jehovah’s approval
and wins the love and respect of his wife and children.
17. How can Christian husbands imitate the unsel?sh attitude of Jesus?
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

239

What Will You Do?
18 Obeying the new commandment to love one another is not an easy course to follow, but we have a
powerful motivation for doing so. Paul wrote: “The
love the Christ has compels us, because this is what
we have judged, that one man died for all . . . , and
he died for all that those who live might live no longer for themselves, but for him who died for them
and was raised up.” (2 Corinthians 5:14, 15) Since Jesus died for us, should we not feel compelled to live
for him? We can do that by following his example of
self-sacri?cing love.
Jesus was not exaggerating when he said: “No
one has love greater than this, that someone should
surrender his soul in behalf of his friends.” (John 15:
13) His willingness to surrender his soul in our behalf was the greatest expression of his love for us.
Yet, someone else has shown us even greater love. Jesus explained: “God loved the world so much that he
gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone
19

18. What motivates us to follow the new commandment to love one another?
19, 20. What precious gift has Jehovah given us, and how can we show
that we accept it?
240

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

What unsel?sh course did Jesus outline for his
followers to take?—Matthew 16:24-26.

?

Why is a self-sacri?cing course worthwhile?
—Mark 10:23-30.

?

How did Jesus prove himself to be the Fine
Shepherd, and what can Christian elders learn from
his example?—John 10:11-15.

?

In what practical ways can we imitate Jesus in
showing self-sacri?cing love?—1 John 3:17, 18.

exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but
have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) God loves us so
much that he gave his Son as a ransom, making it
possible for us to be delivered from sin and death.
(Ephesians 1:7) The ransom is a precious gift from
Jehovah, but he does not force us to accept it.
20 It is up to us to accept Jehovah’s gift. How? By
“exercising faith” in his Son. Faith, however, is not
just words. It is proved by actions, by the way we
live. (James 2:26) We prove our faith in Jesus Christ
by following him day after day. Doing so will bring
rich blessings now and in the future, as the ?nal
chapter of this book will explain.
“NO ONE HAS LOVE GREATER THAN THIS”

241

CHAPTER

18

“Continue Following Me”
ELEVEN men stand together on a mountain. With
great love and admiration, they look upon a 12th ?gure. He is human in form, but in fact he is the resurrected Jesus, once again the mightiest of Jehovah’s spirit sons. Jesus has gathered his apostles to
meet with him here on the Mount of Olives for one
last time.
2 This mount, part of a chain of limestone hills
across the Kidron Valley from Jerusalem, surely
brings a wealth of memories to Jesus’ mind. On these
slopes lies the town of Bethany, where Jesus resurrected Lazarus. Just weeks ago, Jesus set out on his
triumphal ride into Jerusalem from nearby Bethphage. The Mount of Olives is also the probable site
of the garden of Gethsemane, where Jesus spent
the agonizing hours before his arrest. Now on this
same hill, Jesus prepares to leave his closest friends
and followers behind. He utters kind parting words.
1-3. (a) In what manner did Jesus leave his apostles, and why was that
not a forlorn farewell? (b) Why do we need to learn about the life Jesus
has led since returning to heaven?
242

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

Then he begins to rise from the earth! The apostles
stand there rooted to the spot, gazing after their beloved Master as he ascends into the sky. Finally, a
cloud obscures him from their view, and they see
him no more.—Acts 1:6-12.
3

Does that scene strike you as a bittersweet end-

ing, a forlorn farewell? It is not. In fact, as two angels now remind the apostles, Jesus’ story is far from
over. (Acts 1:10, 11) In many ways, his departure toward heaven is just a beginning. God’s Word does
not leave us in the dark about what next happened
to Jesus. Learning about the life Jesus has led since
leaving the earth is important. Why? Remember the
words Jesus spoke to Peter: “Continue following
me.” (John 21:19, 22) We all need to obey that command, not merely as a momentary choice but as a
way of life. In order to do so, we need to understand
what our Master is doing now and the assignments
he has received in heaven.
The Life Jesus Has Led Since Leaving the Earth
4 Regarding Jesus’ arrival in heaven, his welcome,
4. How did the Bible reveal in advance what would happen in heaven after Jesus’ return there?
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

243

and his joyous reunion with his Father, the Scriptures are silent. However, the Bible did reveal in advance what would happen in heaven soon after Jesus’ return there. You see, for over 15 centuries, the
Jewish people had regularly witnessed a holy ceremony. One day each year, the high priest entered
the Most Holy of the temple to sprinkle the blood of
the Atonement Day sacri?ces before the ark of the
covenant. On that day, the high priest pictured the
Messiah. Jesus ful?lled the prophetic meaning of
that ceremony once for all time after he returned to
heaven. He came into Jehovah’s majestic presence in
heaven—the holiest place in the universe—and presented to his Father the value of his ransom sacri?ce. (Hebrews 9:11, 12, 24) Did Jehovah accept it?
5 We ?nd the answer by considering what happened a few days after Jesus’ ascension. A small
band of about 120 Christians were meeting in Jerusalem in an upstairs room when suddenly a noise
like a sti? rushing breeze ?lled the place. Tongues as
if of ?re appeared above their heads, they were ?lled
with holy spirit, and they began speaking in various
5, 6. (a) What evidence showed that Jehovah had accepted Christ’s
ransom sacri?ce? (b) Who bene?t from the ransom, and how?
244

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

tongues. (Acts 2:1-4) This event signi?ed the birth of
a new nation, spiritual Israel, which was God’s new
“chosen race” and “royal priesthood” for carrying
out the divine will on earth. (1 Peter 2:9) Clearly, Jehovah God had accepted and approved Christ’s ransom sacri?ce. This outpouring of holy spirit was
among the ?rst blessings made possible by the ransom.
6

Ever since then, Christ’s ransom has bene?ted his

followers the world over. Whether we are among the
anointed “little ?ock,” who will rule with Christ in
heaven, or are among the “other sheep,” who will
live under his rule on earth, we bene?t from his sacri?ce. (Luke 12:32; John 10:16) It is the basis for our
hope and for forgiveness of our sins. As long as we
continue “exercising faith” in that ransom, following
Jesus day by day, we can enjoy a clean conscience
and a bright hope for the future.—John 3:16.
7

What has Jesus been doing in heaven since his re-

turn there? He has tremendous authority. (Matthew
28:18) Indeed, Jehovah appointed him to rule over
7. Jesus was granted what authority after returning to heaven, and how
may you support him?
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

245

the Christian congregation, an assignment that he
has carried out in a loving and just way. (Colossians
1:13) As foretold, Jesus has provided responsible
men to care for the needs of his ?ock. (Ephesians
4:8) For example, he chose Paul to be “an apostle to
the nations,” sending him to spread the good news
far and wide. (Romans 11:13; 1 Timothy 2:7) Near
the end of the ?rst century, Jesus directed messages
of commendation, counsel, and correction to seven
congregations in the Roman province of Asia. (Revelation, chapters 2-3) Do you recognize Jesus as
Head of the Christian congregation? (Ephesians 5:
23) In order to continue following him, you will
want to promote an obedient, cooperative spirit in
your local congregation.
8

Jesus was granted still more authority in 1914. In

that year he was appointed as King of Jehovah’s
Messianic Kingdom. When Jesus’ rule began, “war
broke out in heaven.” The result? Satan and his demons were hurled to the earth, triggering an era of
woe. The rampant wars, crime, terror, disease, earth8, 9. What authority was Jesus granted in 1914, and what should that
mean for us in the decisions we make?
246

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

quakes, and famines that have a?icted modern man
remind us that Jesus is ruling in heaven right now.
Satan is still “the ruler of this world” for “a short period of time.” (Revelation 12:7-12; John 12:31; Matthew 24:3-7; Luke 21:11) However, Jesus is giving
people worldwide the opportunity to accept His rulership.
9

It is vital that we take our stand on the side of

the Messianic King. In all our daily decisions, we
must seek his approval, not that of this corrupt
world. As this “King of kings and Lord of lords” surveys mankind, his righteous heart blazes with anger
and over?ows with joy. (Revelation 19:16) Why?
10

The Anger and the Joy of the Messianic King
Like his Father, our Master is by nature happy.

(1 Timothy 1:11) As a man, Jesus was neither critical nor hard to please. Yet, there is much happening
on the earth today that must ?ll him with righteous
anger. He is certainly angry at all those religious organizations that falsely claim to represent him. He
foretold as much: “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord,
10. What is Jesus’ natural disposition, yet what ?lls our Master with
righteous anger?
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

247

Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens,
but the one doing the will of my Father who is in the
heavens will. Many will say to me in that day, ‘Lord,
Lord, did we not . . . perform many powerful works
in your name?’ And yet then I will confess to them:
I never knew you! Get away from me, you workers of
lawlessness.”—Matthew 7:21-23.
11

Many today who call themselves Christians

might ?nd those words puzzling. Why would Jesus
direct such strong words to people who have been
performing “many powerful works” in his name?
The churches of Christendom have sponsored charities, aided the poor, built hospitals and schools, and
performed many other works. To see why they have
earned Jesus’ anger, consider an illustration.
12

A father and mother need to go on a trip. They

cannot take their children along, so they hire a babysitter. Their instructions to her are simple: “Take
care of our children. Feed them, make sure they are
clean, and keep them from harm.” When the parents
11-13. Why might some be puzzled by the strong words Jesus directed
toward those performing “many powerful works” in his name, yet why
is he angry? Illustrate.
248

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

return, though, they are shocked to see that their
children are famished. They are dirty, sickly, and
miserable. They are crying for the babysitter’s attention, but their cries go unheeded. Why? She is up on
a ladder, washing the windows. Furious, the parents
demand an explanation. The sitter replies: “Look at
all that I did! Aren’t the windows clean? I made repairs to the house too, all for you!” Would the parents feel better? Hardly! They never asked her to do
those jobs; they just wanted their children cared for.
Her refusal to heed their instructions would infuriate them.
13 Christendom has acted like that babysitter. Jesus
left instructions with his representatives to feed people spiritually by teaching them the truth of God’s
Word and helping them to be spiritually clean. (John
21:15-17) Yet, Christendom has dismally failed to
obey his direction. She has left people spiritually
starved, confused by falsehoods and ignorant of basic Bible truths. (Isaiah 65:13; Amos 8:11) Even her
attempts to better this world can hardly excuse her
willful disobedience. After all, this world system is
like a house that is slated for demolition! God’s
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

249

Word makes it clear that Satan’s world system is
soon to be destroyed.—1 John 2:15-17.
14 On the other hand, Jesus must be very happy to
look down from heaven and see that millions of
people are ful?lling the disciple-making commission
that he gave his followers before leaving the earth.
(Matthew 28:19, 20) What a privilege it is to contribute to the joy of the Messianic King! Let us be determined never to give up in assisting “the faithful and
discreet slave.” (Matthew 24:45) Unlike Christendom’s clergy, this small group of anointed brothers
has obediently directed the preaching work and has
faithfully fed Christ’s sheep.
15 We can be sure that the King is angry when he
sees the lovelessness that prevails on the earth today. We might recall how the Pharisees criticized Jesus for performing cures on the Sabbath. They were
so hard-hearted, so set in their ways, that they could
not see past their own narrow interpretation of the
Mosaic Law and the oral law. Jesus’ miracles did
14. What work is making Jesus happy today, and why?
15, 16. (a) How does Jesus feel about the lovelessness so prevalent today, and how do we know that? (b) How has Christendom earned Jesus’
anger?
250

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

good beyond measure! But the joy, the relief, the
strengthening of faith that such miracles brought
about meant nothing to those men. How did Jesus
feel about them? He once looked “around upon them
with indignation, being thoroughly grieved at the insensibility of their hearts.”—Mark 3:5.
Today, Jesus sees far more to make him feel
“thoroughly grieved.” The leaders of Christendom
are blinded by their devotion to traditions and doctrines that are at odds with the Scriptures. Further,
they are enraged by the preaching of the good news
of God’s Kingdom. In many parts of the world, the
clergy have fomented vicious persecution against
those Christians who sincerely try to preach the message that Jesus preached. (John 16:2; Revelation 18:
4, 24) At the same time, such clergymen often exhort
their own followers to go to war and take the lives
of others—as if doing so would please Jesus Christ!
17 In contrast, Jesus’ genuine followers endeavor to
show love to their fellow man. They share the good
news with “all sorts of men,” just as Jesus did, despite opposition. (1 Timothy 2:4) And the love they
16

17. How do Jesus’ genuine followers make his heart rejoice?
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

251

show to one another is outstanding; it is their chief
identifying mark. (John 13:34, 35) As they treat their
fellow Christians with love, respect, and dignity,
they are truly following Jesus—and making the heart
of the Messianic King rejoice!
18 Let us also keep in mind that our Master is distressed when his followers fail to endure, letting
their love for Jehovah cool o? and giving up as
His servants. (Revelation 2:4, 5) However, Jesus is
pleased with those who endure to the end. (Matthew
24:13) By all means, then, let us keep ever in mind
Christ’s command: “Continue following me.” (John
21:19) Let us consider some of the blessings that the
Messianic King will bestow on those who endure to
the end.
Blessings Flow to Faithful S ervants of the King
19 Following Jesus is the way to a truly blessed life
right now. If we accept Christ as our Master, following his direction and using his example as our guide,
we will ?nd treasures that people the world over
seek in vain. We will be blessed with work that ?lls
18. What distresses our Master, yet how may we please him?
19, 20. (a) Following Jesus leads to what blessings right now? (b) How
can following Christ help us to ?ll our need for a father?
252

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

our life with purpose and meaning, a family of fellow believers united in a genuine bond of love, a
clean conscience, and peace of mind. In short, we
will ?nd a life that is rich and satisfying. And we will
?nd still more.
20 In Jesus, Jehovah has provided an “Eternal Father” for those who hope to live forever on earth. Jesus is a replacement for the human father, Adam,
who failed all his o?spring so miserably. (Isaiah 9:
6, 7) By accepting Jesus as our “Eternal Father,” exercising faith in him, we have a sure hope of everlasting life. Further, we thereby get ever closer to Jehovah God. As we have learned, striving to follow
Jesus’ example day by day is the best possible way to
obey this divine command: “Become imitators of
God, as beloved children.”—Ephesians 5:1.
As we imitate Jesus and his Father, Jehovah, we
have a wonderful privilege. We re?ect a brilliant
light. In a world shrouded in darkness, where billions are misled by Satan and imitate his traits,
we who follow Christ spread abroad re?ections of
the brightest light—the light of Scriptural truths,
21

21. How do followers of Christ re?ect light in a dark world?
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

253

the light of ?ne Christian qualities, the light of genuine joy, true peace, real love. At the same time, we
draw closer to Jehovah, and that is the ultimate goal,
the highest possible aim, of any intelligent creature.
22 Think, too, of what Jehovah wants to do for you
in the future by means of his Messianic King. Soon
that King will wage righteous warfare against Satan’s wicked system of things. Jesus’ victory is sure!
(Revelation 19:11-15) Afterward, Christ will begin
his Thousand Year Reign over the earth. His heavenly government will dispense the bene?ts of the
ransom to every faithful human, raising such ones to
perfection. Imagine yourself vibrant in health, ever
young and strong, happily working with a united human family to turn this earth into a paradise! At the
end of that Millennium, Jesus will hand the rulership back to his Father. (1 Corinthians 15:24) If you
continue loyally following Christ, you will be granted a blessing so wonderful that it is hard even to
imagine—“the glorious freedom of the children of
God”! (Romans 8:21) Yes, we will have all the blessings that Adam and Eve had and lost. Earthly sons
22, 23. (a) What future blessings will come to those who loyally continue to follow Jesus? (b) What should be our determination?
254

“COME BE MY FOLLOWER”

How Can You Follow Jesus?
?

What will help you to bring your thinking
into harmony with that of Christ?
—1 Corinthians 2:13-16.

?

In what ways do you intend to follow Jesus more
closely?—1 Peter 2:21.

?

How will you avoid the danger of cooling o? in
your love for Jesus?—Revelation 3:14-18.

?

How can you show that you really want Christ
to rule over the earth in the near future?
—Revelation 22:17, 20.

and daughters of Jehovah, we will be forever free of
the stain of Adam’s sin. Truly, “death will be no
more.”—Revelation 21:4.
23

Recall that wealthy young ruler we discussed in

Chapter 1. He turned down Jesus’ invitation: “Come
be my follower.” (Mark 10:17-22) Never make that
mistake! May you take hold of Jesus’ invitation with
joy and enthusiasm. May you be determined to endure, to continue following the Fine Shepherd day
by day, year by year, and live to see him bring all of
Jehovah’s purposes to glorious ful?llment at last!
“CONTINUE FOLLOWING ME”

255

Would you welcome more information?

You may contact Jehovah’s Witnesses at www.jw.org.

