YOU CAN BE

74G 6954I

TABLE OF CONTENTS

LESSON

God Invites You to Become His Friend
God Is the Best Friend You Could Ever Have
You Need to Learn About God
How You Can Learn About God
God’s Friends Will Live in Paradise
Paradise Is Near!
A Warning From the Past
Who Are God’s Enemies?
Who Are God’s Friends?
How to Find the True Religion
Reject False Religion!
What Happens at Death?
Magic and Witchcraft Are Bad
God’s Friends Avoid What Is Bad
God’s Friends Do What Is Good
Show Your Love for God
To Keep a Friend, You Must Be a Friend
Be God’s Friend Forever!

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

© 2000
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
January 2014 Printing
This publication is not for sale.
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational
work supported by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are
from the modern-language New World Translation of
the Holy Scriptures—With References.
You Can Be God’s Friend!
English (gf-E)
Made in the United States of America

 LESSON 1 

GOD INVITES YOU TO BECOME HIS FRIEND
God wants you to be his friend. Have you ever thought that you
could be a friend of the greatest Person in the universe? Abraham,
who lived long ago, was called God’s friend. ( James 2:23) Others
spoken of in the Bible also enjoyed God’s friendship and were greatly blessed. Today, people from all parts of the earth have become
friends of God. You too can be God’s friend.
Being a friend of God is better than being a
friend of any human. God never disappoints
his loyal friends. (Psalm 18:25) Being a friend of
God is better than having riches. When a rich
person dies, his money goes to others. However,
those who enjoy friendship with God have a treasure that no one can take away.—Matthew 6:19.
Some people may try to stop you from learning about God. Even some of your friends and
family may do this. (Matthew 10:36, 37) If others laugh at you or threaten you, ask yourself,
‘Whom do I want to please—humans or God?’
Think about this: If someone told you to stop
eating, would you obey him? Of course not! You
need food to live. But God can make you live forever! So never let anyone stop you from learning
how you can be a friend of God.—John 17:3.

 LESSON 2 

GOD IS THE BEST FRIEND YOU COULD EVER HAVE
Becoming God’s friend is the best
thing that could ever happen to
you. God will teach you how to be
happy and secure; he will free you
from many wrong beliefs and harmful practices. He will listen to your
prayers. He will help you to enjoy inner peace and con?dence. (Psalm 71:5;
73:28) God will support you during
times of trouble. (Psalm 18:18) And
God o?ers you his gift of everlasting
life.—Romans 6:23.
As you draw close to God, you will
draw close to friends of God. They
will become your friends too. In fact,
they will be like brothers and sisters
to you. They will be happy to teach
you about God and will help you and
encourage you.
We are not equal to God. As you
seek God’s friendship, you must understand an important fact. Friendship with God is not a friendship
between equals. He is far older and
wiser and is more powerful than we
are. He is our rightful Ruler. So if we
want to be his friend, we must listen
to him and do what he tells us to do.
This will always work for our good.
—Isaiah 48:18.
4

 LESSON 3 

YOU NEED TO LEARN ABOUT GOD
To be God’s friend, you need to learn
about him. Do your friends know your
name and use it? They do. God wants you
to know and use his name too. God’s name
is Jehovah. (Psalm 83:18; Matthew 6:9) You
must also learn what he likes and dislikes.
You need to know who his friends are and
who his enemies are. It takes time to get
to know someone. The Bible says that it is
wise to set aside time to learn about Jehovah.—Ephesians 5:15, 16.
God’s friends do what is pleasing to him.
Think about your friends. If you treat them
badly and do the things that they hate, will
they continue to be your friends? Of course
not! In the same way, if you want to be
God’s friend, you need to do what is pleasing to him.—John 4:24.
Not all religions lead to friendship
with God. Jesus, who is God’s closest
friend, spoke of two roads. One road is
wide and is ?lled with people. That road
leads to destruction. The other road is
narrow and has few people traveling on it.
That road leads to everlasting life. This
means that if you want to have God’s
friendship, you must learn the correct
way to worship him.—Matthew 7:13, 14.
5

 LESSON 4 

HOW YOU CAN LEARN ABOUT GOD
You can learn about Jehovah by reading the Bible. Long ago God picked certain humans to write down his thoughts.
Those writings are called the Bible. Today
we learn about God by reading the Bible. Because the Bible contains Jehovah’s
word, or message, it is also called God’s
Word. We can believe what the Bible says
because Jehovah never lies. “It is impossible for God to lie.” (Hebrews 6:18) God’s
Word contains the truth.—John 17:17.

The Bible is one of God’s most precious gifts to us. It is like a letter from a
loving father to his children. It tells us
about God’s promise to change the earth
into a wonderful place to live—a paradise.
It tells us what he has done in the past,
what he is doing now, and what he will do
in the future for his faithful children. It
also helps us to solve our problems and to
?nd happiness.—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
6

Jehovah’s Witnesses are friends of
God; they will help you understand
what the Bible teaches. Just tell them
that you want to study the Bible. They
do not charge money for this. (Matthew
10:8) In addition, you can attend Christian meetings. These are held in places of
worship called Kingdom Halls. If you attend Christian meetings, you will rapidly
grow in your knowledge of God.
You can learn about God from the
things he has made. For example, the Bible says: “God created the heavens and the
earth.” (Genesis 1:1) When Jehovah created “the heavens,” he made the sun. Now
what does that tell us about God? It tells
us that Jehovah has great power. Only he
could make something as powerful as the
sun. It also tells us that Jehovah is wise,
since it required wisdom to make the sun,
which gives out heat and light and never
burns out.
Jehovah’s creation shows that he loves
us. Think about all the di?erent kinds
of fruits that there are on earth. Jehovah
could have provided just one kind of fruit
for us—or none at all. Instead, Jehovah
gave us many types of fruit with a great
variety of shapes, sizes, colors, and tastes.
This shows that Jehovah is a God who is
not only loving but also very generous and
thoughtful and kind.—Psalm 104:24.
7

 LESSON 5 

GOD’S FRIENDS WILL LIVE IN PARADISE
Paradise will not be like the world we
live in now. God never wanted the earth to
be ?lled with trouble and sorrow, pain and
su?ering. In the future, God will make the
earth a paradise. What will Paradise be like?
Let us see what the Bible says:
Good people. Paradise will be the home of
God’s friends. They will do good things for
one another. They will live according to the
righteous ways of God.—Proverbs 2:21.
Plenty of food. In Paradise, there will be no
hunger. The Bible says: “There will come to
be plenty of grain [or, food] on the earth.”
—Psalm 72:16.
Fine houses and enjoyable work. On the
Paradise earth, every family will have a
home of its own. Everyone will do
work that brings true happiness.—Isaiah
65:21-23.

8

Peace worldwide. No longer will people
?ght and die in war. God’s Word says:
“[God] is making wars to cease.”—Psalm 46:
8, 9.
Good health. The Bible promises: “No resident [of Paradise] will say: ‘I am sick.’ ” (Isaiah 33:24) Also, no one will be lame or blind
or deaf or unable to talk.—Isaiah 35:5, 6.
An end to pain, sorrow, and death. God’s
Word says: “Death will be no more, neither
will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
—Revelation 21:4.
Bad people will be gone. Jehovah promises: “The wicked . . . will be cut o? from the
very earth; and as for the treacherous, they
will be torn away from it.”—Proverbs 2:22.
People will love and respect one another. No longer will there be injustice, oppression, greed, and hatred. People will be
united and will live in harmony with God’s
righteous ways.—Isaiah 26:9.

 LESSON 6 

PARADISE IS NEAR!
The bad things that are now happening on earth show that
Paradise is near. The Bible said that we would see terrible times
just before the Paradise would come. We are living in such times
now! Here are some of the things that the Bible said would happen:
Great wars. “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.”
(Matthew 24:7) This prophecy has come
true. Since the year 1914, there have been
two world wars and many smaller wars.
Millions of people have died in them.
Widespread disease. There would be “in
one place after another pestilences.” (Luke
21:11) Has this come true? Yes. Cancer,
heart disease, tuberculosis, malaria, AIDS,
and other diseases have killed millions of
people.
A lack of food. Throughout the earth
there are people who do not have enough
food to eat. Millions of people die of hunger every year. This is another sign that
the Paradise will soon be here. The Bible says: “There will be food shortages.”
—Mark 13:8.

10

Earthquakes. “There will be . . . earthquakes in one place after another.” (Matthew 24:7) This also has come true in our time. Over
a million people have died in earthquakes since 1914.
Wicked people. People would be “lovers of money” and “lovers of
themselves.” They would be “lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” Children would be “disobedient to parents.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5) Do you
not agree that there are many people like
that today? They have no respect for God,
and they make trouble for those who try to
learn about God.
Crime. There would also be an “increasing of lawlessness.” (Matthew 24:12) Likely you will agree that crime is worse than it
was years ago. People everywhere are at risk
of being robbed, cheated, or harmed.
All these things show that God’s Kingdom is near. The Bible says: “When you
see these things occurring, know that the
kingdom of God is near.” (Luke 21:31)
What is the Kingdom of God? It is God’s
heavenly government that will bring Paradise to this earth. God’s Kingdom will replace human governments.—Daniel 2:44.

11

 LESSON 7 

A WARNING FROM THE PAST
Jehovah will not allow bad people to
ruin Paradise. Only his friends will live
there. What will happen to bad people?
To learn the answer, consider the true
story of Noah. Noah lived thousands of
years ago. He was a good man who always tried hard to do Jehovah’s will. But
the other people on earth did bad things.
So Jehovah told Noah that He was going
to bring a ?ood to destroy all those wicked people. He told Noah to build an ark
so that he and his family would not die
when the Flood came.—Genesis 6:9-18.

Noah and his family built the ark.
Noah warned people that the Flood was
coming, but they did not listen to him.
They continued to do bad things. After
the ark was ?nished, Noah took animals
into the ark, and he and his family also
went inside. Then Jehovah brought a
great storm. Rain fell for 40 days and 40
nights. The water ?ooded all the earth.
—Genesis 7:7-12.
12

The wicked people lost their lives, but
Noah and his family were saved. Jehovah brought them safely through the
Flood into an earth cleansed of wickedness. (Genesis 7:22, 23) The Bible says
that once again the time is coming when
Jehovah will destroy those who refuse to
do what is right. Good people will not
be destroyed. They will live forever on
the Paradise earth.—2 Peter 2:5, 6, 9.

Today many people do bad things.
The world is full of trouble. Jehovah
sends his Witnesses again and again to
warn the people, yet most do not want
to listen to Jehovah’s words. They do
not want to change their ways. They do
not want to accept what God says about
right and wrong. What will happen to
these people? Will they change someday? Many will never change. The time is
coming when wicked people will be destroyed and will never live again.—Psalm
92:7.
The earth will not be destroyed; it will
be made into a paradise. Those who
become God’s friends will live forever in
the Paradise on earth.—Psalm 37:29.
13

 LESSON 8 

WHO ARE GOD’S ENEMIES?
God’s chief enemy is Satan the Devil. He is a spirit creature who rebelled
against Jehovah. Satan continues to
?ght against God and causes great trouble for humans. Satan is evil. He is a liar
and a murderer.—John 8:44.
Other spirit creatures joined Satan in
his rebellion against God. The Bible
calls them demons. Like Satan, the demons are enemies of humans. They like
to hurt people. (Matthew 9:32, 33; 12:
22) Jehovah will destroy Satan and his
demons forever. They have only a short
time left to make trouble for humans.
—Revelation 12:12.
If you want to be God’s friend, you
must not do what Satan wants you to
do. Satan and the demons hate Jehovah.
They are enemies of God, and they want
to make you an enemy of God. You must
choose whom you want to please—Satan
or Jehovah. If you want everlasting life,
you must choose to do God’s will. Satan
has many tricks and ways to deceive people. Most people are being fooled by
him.—Revelation 12:9.

14

 LESSON 9 

WHO ARE GOD’S FRIENDS?
Jesus Christ is Jehovah’s Son and
his closest, dearest friend. Before he
lived as a man on earth, Jesus lived
in heaven as a mighty spirit creature. ( John 17:5) Then he came to
earth to teach people the truth about
God. (John 18:37) He also gave his
human life to save obedient humans
from sin and death. (Romans 6:23) Jesus is now the King of God’s Kingdom, a heavenly government that will
bring Paradise to this earth.—Revelation 19:16.
The angels are also God’s friends. The angels did not begin their lives as humans on
earth. They were created in heaven before
God made the earth. ( Job 38:4-7) There are
millions of angels. (Daniel 7:10) These heavenly friends of God want people to learn the
truth about Jehovah.—Revelation 14:6, 7.
God also has friends on the earth; he
calls them his witnesses. A witness in
court tells what he knows about someone
or something. Jehovah’s Witnesses tell others what they know about Jehovah and his
purpose. (Isaiah 43:10) Like the angels, the
Witnesses want to help you learn the truth
about Jehovah. They want you to be God’s
friend too.
15

 L E S S O N 10 

HOW TO FIND THE TRUE RELIGION
If you want to be a friend of God, you
must practice the religion that God
approves. Jesus said that “the true worshipers” would worship God in harmony with “truth.” ( John 4:23, 24) There
is only one correct way to worship God.
(Ephesians 4:4-6) True religion leads to
everlasting life, and false religion leads to
destruction.—Matthew 7:13, 14.
You can recognize true religion by
watching the people who practice it.
Since Jehovah is good, those who are his
true worshipers must be good people.
Just as a good orange tree produces ?ne
oranges, the true religion produces ?ne
people.—Matthew 7:15-20.
Jehovah’s friends have deep respect
for the Bible. They know that the Bible is from God. They allow what it says
to guide their lives, to solve their problems, and to help them learn about God.
(2 Timothy 3:16) They try to practice
what they preach.

16

Jehovah’s friends show love for one
another. Jesus showed love for people
by teaching them about God, by curing
those who were sick. Those who practice
the true religion also show love to others. Like Jesus, they do not look down
on those who are poor or are of a di?erent ethnic group. Jesus said that people
would know his disciples by the love they
show for one another.—John 13:35.
God’s friends honor God’s name, Jehovah. If someone refused to use your
name, would that person be your close
friend? No! When we have a friend, we
use his name and we say good things
about that friend to others. So those
who wish to be God’s friends should use
his name and talk about him to others.
Jehovah wants us to do that.—Matthew
6:9; Romans 10:13, 14.
Like Jesus, God’s friends teach people
about God’s Kingdom. God’s Kingdom is the heavenly government that
will make the earth a paradise. God’s
friends share this good news about
God’s Kingdom with others.—Matthew
24:14.
Jehovah’s Witnesses try to be friends
of God. They respect the Bible and have
love among themselves. They also use
and honor God’s name and teach others
about God’s Kingdom. Jehovah’s Witnesses practice the true religion on earth
today.
17

 L E S S O N 11 

REJECT FALSE RELIGION!
Satan and his demons do not want you
to serve God. They want to turn everyone
away from God if they can. How do they try
to do this? One way is through false religion. (2 Corinthians 11:13-15) A religion is
false if it does not teach the truth from
the Bible. False religion is like false money
—it may look like the real thing, but it is
worthless. It can cause you much trouble.

Religious falsehood can never please Jehovah, the God of truth. When Jesus
was on earth, there was a religious group
who wanted to kill him. They thought that
their way of worship was the right way.
They said: “We have one Father, God.” Did
Jesus agree? No! He said to them: “You are
from your father the Devil.” ( John 8:41,
44) Today many people think that they are
worshiping God, but they are really serving Satan and his demons!—1 Corinthians
10:20.
18

Just as a rotten tree produces bad fruit, false religion produces people who do bad things. The
world is full of trouble because of the bad things
people do. There is immorality, ?ghting, stealing, oppression, murder, and rape. Many who do
these bad things have a religion, but their religion does not move them to practice what
is good. They cannot be God’s friends unless
they stop doing bad things.—Matthew 7:17, 18.
False religion teaches people to pray to
idols. God says not to pray to idols. This is
reasonable. Would you like it if someone never talked to you but only talked to your picture? Could that person be your true friend?
No, he could not. Jehovah wants people to talk
to him, not to a statue or a picture, which has
no life.—Exodus 20:4, 5.
False religion teaches that it is all right to
kill others in time of war. Jesus said that
God’s friends would have love among themselves. We do not kill people we love. ( John 13:
35) It is even wrong for us to kill bad people.
When the enemies of Jesus came to arrest him,
he did not let his disciples ?ght to protect him.
—Matthew 26:51, 52.
False religion teaches that the wicked will
su?er in hell?re. Yet, the Bible teaches that
sin leads to death. (Romans 6:23) Jehovah is a
God of love. Would a loving God torment people forever? Of course not! In Paradise, there
will be only one religion, the one that Jehovah
approves. (Revelation 15:4) All religions based
on Satan’s lies will be gone.
19

 L E S S O N 12 

WHAT HAPPENS AT DEATH?
Death is the opposite of life. Death is like a deep sleep. ( John
11:11-14) The dead are unable to hear, see, speak, or think anything.
(Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10) False religion teaches that the dead go to a
spirit world to live with their ancestors. That is not what the Bible
teaches.
Those who have died cannot help us,
and they cannot harm us. It is common
for people to perform rituals and sacri?ces that they believe will please those
who have died. This is displeasing to God
because it is based on one of Satan’s lies.
It cannot please the dead either, since they
are lifeless. We should not fear or worship
the dead. We should worship only God.
—Matthew 4:10.
The dead will live again. Jehovah will
awaken the dead to life on a paradise
earth. That time is yet future. ( John 5:28,
29; Acts 24:15) God can awaken those who
have died just as surely as you can awaken a person from sleep.—Mark 5:22, 23,
41, 42.
The idea that we do not die is a lie
spread by Satan the Devil. Satan and his
demons make people think that spirits of
the dead are alive and cause sickness and
other problems. Satan deceives people, at
times through dreams and visions. Jehovah condemns those who try to talk to the
dead.—Deuteronomy 18:10-12.

 L E S S O N 13 

MAGIC AND WITCHCRAFT ARE BAD
Satan wants you to practice magic.
Many make sacri?ces to ancestors or
spirits to protect themselves from harm.
They do this because they fear the powers of the spirit world. They wear magical rings or bracelets. They drink or rub
on their bodies “medicines” that are supposed to have magical power. In their
homes or in the ground, some people
hide articles believed to have protective
powers. Others use magical “medicine”
because they believe it will bring success
in business, school exams, or courtship.

Your best protection against Satan is
to have Jehovah as your friend. Jehovah
God and his angels are far more powerful than Satan and his demons. ( James 2:
19; Revelation 12:9) Jehovah is eager to
show his strength in behalf of his friends
—those who are completely loyal to him.
—2 Chronicles 16:9.
God’s Word says: “You must not practice magic.” Jehovah condemns magic
and witchcraft because those practices
can put one directly under the power of
Satan the Devil.—Leviticus 19:26.
21

 L E S S O N 14 

GOD’S FRIENDS AVOID WHAT IS BAD
Satan tempts people to do bad
things. A person who wants to be
God’s friend needs to hate what Jehovah hates. (Psalm 97:10) Here are
some things that God’s friends avoid:
Sexual sins. “You must not
commit adultery.” (Exodus 20:
14) Having sex before marriage
is also wrong.—1 Corinthians
6:18.

Drunkenness. “Drunkards . . .
will [not] inherit God’s kingdom.”—1 Corinthians 6:10.

Murder, Abortion. “You must
not murder.”—Exodus 20:13.
Theft. “You must not steal.”
—Exodus 20:15.

Lying. Jehovah hates “a false
tongue.”—Proverbs 6:17.

22

Violence and Uncontrolled Anger. “Anyone loving violence [ Jehovah] certainly
hates.” (Psalm 11:5) “The works of the ?esh
[include] . . . ?ts of anger.”—Galatians 5:
19, 20.
Gambling. “Quit mixing in company with
anyone . . . that is a . . . greedy person.”
—1 Corinthians 5:11.
Racial and Ethnic Hatreds. “Continue to
love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you.”—Matthew 5:43, 44.
The things God tells us are for our good.
It is not always easy to avoid doing bad
things. With Jehovah’s help and with the
help of his Witnesses, you can avoid doing
the things that displease God.—Isaiah 48:
17; Philippians 4:13; Hebrews 10:24, 25.
23

 L E S S O N 15 

GOD’S FRIENDS DO WHAT IS GOOD
When you have a friend whom you admire and respect, you try to be like
him. “Good and upright is Jehovah,”
says the Bible. (Psalm 25:8) To be God’s
friend, we must be good and upright. The
Bible says: “Become imitators of God, as
beloved children, and go on walking in
love.” (Ephesians 5:1, 2) Here are some
ways to do that:
Be helpful to others. “Let us work what
is good toward all.”—Galatians 6:10.
Work hard. “Let the stealer steal no
more, but rather let him do hard work,
doing with his hands what is good work.”
—Ephesians 4:28.
Keep physically and morally clean. “Let
us cleanse ourselves of every de?lement
of ?esh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
God’s fear.”—2 Corinthians 7:1.

24

Treat your family members with
love and respect. “Let each one of
you . . . love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife
should have deep respect for her
husband. Children, be obedient to
your parents.”—Ephesians 5:33–6:1.

Show love to others. “Let us continue loving one another, because
love is from God.”—1 John 4:7.
Obey the laws of the land. “Let
every soul be in subjection to the
[government] . . . Render to all
their dues, to him who calls for
the tax, the tax.”—Romans 13:1, 7.

25

 L E S S O N 16 

SHOW YOUR LOVE FOR GOD
To keep a friend, you need to talk with
him. You listen to him, and he listens to
you. You also say good things about your
friend to others. It is the same with being
a friend of God. Consider what the Bible
says about this:
Talk to Jehovah regularly in prayer.
“Persevere in prayer.”—Romans 12:12.
Read God’s Word, the Bible. “All Scripture is inspired of God and bene?cial for
teaching, for reproving, for setting things
straight.”—2 Timothy 3:16.
Teach others about God. “Go therefore
and make disciples of people of all the
nations, . . . teaching them to observe
all the things I have commanded you.”
—Matthew 28:19, 20.

26

?i °?? ) ?")0	"G- 
#.(---

Draw close to God’s friends. “He that
is walking with wise persons will become wise.”—Proverbs 13:20.
Attend meetings at the Kingdom
Hall. “Let us consider one another to
incite to love and ?ne works, . . . encouraging one another.”—Hebrews 10:
24, 25.
Help support the Kingdom work.
“Let each one [give] just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly
or under compulsion, for God loves a
cheerful giver.”—2 Corinthians 9:7.

27

 L E S S O N 17 

TO KEEP A FRIEND, YOU MUST BE A FRIEND
Friendship is based on love. The more
you learn about Jehovah, the greater will
be your love for him. As your love for God
grows, your desire to serve him will also
grow. This will move you to become a
disciple of Jesus Christ. (Matthew 28:19)
By joining the happy family of Jehovah’s
Witnesses, you can experience God’s
friendship forever. What must you do?
You must show your love for God by
obeying his laws. “This is what the love
of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments
are not burdensome.”—1 John 5:3.
Apply what you learn. Jesus told a
story that illustrates this. A wise man
built his house on rock. A foolish
man built his house on sand. When a
great storm came, the house built on
rock did not cave in, but the house
built on sand fell with a great crash.
Jesus said that those who hear his
teachings and do them are like the
wise man who built on rock. But
those who listen to his teachings and
do not do them are like the foolish
man who built on sand. Which man
do you want to be like?—Matthew 7:
24-27.
28

Dedication. This means that you go to
Jehovah in prayer and tell him that you
want to do his will forever. Doing God’s
will shows that you are a disciple of Jesus
Christ.—Matthew 11:29.
Baptism. “Get baptized and wash your
sins away by your calling upon his
name.”—Acts 22:16.
Become fully involved in serving God.
“Whatever you are doing, work at it
whole-souled as to Jehovah, and not to
men.”—Colossians 3:23.

29

 L E S S O N 18 

BE GOD’S FRIEND F OREVER!
It takes e?ort to make a friend; it
takes e?ort to keep a friend. Your efforts to become and remain a friend of
God will be richly blessed. Jesus said to
those who believed in him: “The truth
will set you free.” ( John 8:32) What
does that mean?
You can enjoy freedom now. You can
be free from the false teachings and lies
that have been spread by Satan. You
can be free from the hopelessness that
?lls the lives of millions of people who
do not know Jehovah. (Romans 8:22)
God’s friends are even free from the
“fear of death.”—Hebrews 2:14, 15.
You can enjoy freedom in God’s new
world. What marvelous freedom you
can enjoy in the future! In the Paradise earth, there will be freedom from
war, sickness, and crime. Freedom from
poverty and hunger. Freedom from old
age and death. Freedom from fear, oppression, and injustice. The Bible says
of God: “You are opening your hand
and satisfying the desire of every living
thing.”—Psalm 145:16.

God’s friends will live forever.
Everlasting life is a precious gift
that God will give to all who seek
his friendship. (Romans 6:23) Just
think of what endless life would
mean for you!
You will have time to do many
things. Perhaps you would like to
learn how to play a musical instrument. Or maybe you want to learn to
paint pictures or to be a carpenter.
You might like to learn about animals or plants. Or possibly you want
to travel and see di?erent lands and
peoples. Having everlasting life will
make all these things possible!
You will have time to make many
friends. Living forever will make it
possible to get to know many others who have become God’s friends.
You will come to know their talents
and ?ne qualities, and they will be
your friends too. You will love them,
and they will love you. (1 Corinthians 13:8) Having endless life will give
you the time to befriend everyone
on earth! Best of all, your friendship
with Jehovah will grow ever stronger
as the centuries pass. May you be
God’s friend forever!

31

Would you welcome more information?

gf-E
140127

You may contact Jehovah’s Witnesses at www.jw.org.

