Your Family
Can Be Happy

Your Family Can Be Happy
In these critical times when marriage and family are under attack, is it
possible to be happy as a family? This is not a simple matter. But there
is help available. Even though this brochure is not a complete marriage
manual, it highlights solid Bible principles and practical suggestions.
If applied properly, these will contribute to the happiness of your family.

>

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTIONPAGE

1 Look to God for a Happy Marriage

3

2 Be Loyal to Each Other

6

3 How to Solve Problems

9

4 How to Manage Money

12

5 How to Keep Peace With Your
Relatives15

6 How Babies Change a Marriage

18

7 How to Educate Your Child

22

8 When Tragedy Strikes

26

9 Worship Jehovah as a Family

29

© 2014
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
WATCHTOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, INC.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
January 2014 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations. Unless otherwise
indicated, Scripture quotations are from the modern-language New World
Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
Your Family Can Be Happy
English (hf-E)
Made in the United States of America

from the beginning made
them male and female.”
—Matthew 19:4

Jehovah God performed the ?rst marriage. The Bible tells us that he made the
?rst woman and “brought her to the man.” Adam was so happy that he said:
“This is at last bone of my bones and ?esh of my ?esh.” (Genesis 2:22, 23)
Jehovah still wants married people to be happy.
When you get married, you may think that everything will be perfect. Realistically, though, even a husband and a wife who truly love each other will have
some problems. (1 Corinthians 7:28) In this brochure, you will ?nd Bible principles that, if applied, can make your marriage and family happy.—Psalm 19:8-11.
Jehovah is the name of God as revealed in the Bible.

1

“The one who created them

SECTION

Look to God
for a Happy
Marriage

1
ACCEPT THE ROLE JEHOVAH GAVE YOU
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: The husband is the head of the
family.—Ephesians 5:23.
If you are a husband, Jehovah expects you to care
for your wife tenderly. (1 Peter 3:7) He made her as a complement of you, and he wants you to treat her with dignity
and love. (Genesis 2:18) You must love your wife so much
that you are willing to put her interests ahead of your
own.—Ephesians 5:25-29.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Ask your mate how you can be
a better husband or wife. Listen
carefully, and do what you can
to improve
Be patient. It will take time for
both of you to learn how to
make each other happy

If you are a wife, Jehovah expects you to respect your
husband deeply and to help him ful?ll his role. (1 Corinthians 11:3; Ephesians 5:33) Support his decisions and
wholeheartedly cooperate with him. (Colossians 3:18)
When you do, you will be beautiful in the eyes of your
husband and of Jehovah.—1 Peter 3:1-6.

2
REALLY CARE ABOUT YOUR MATE’S FEELINGS
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: You need to look out for the
interests of your marriage mate. (Philippians 2:3, 4) Treat
your mate as precious, remembering that Jehovah requires his servants to be “gentle toward all.” (2 Timothy
2:24) “Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, but
the tongue of the wise is a healing.” So choose your words
carefully. (Proverbs 12:18) Jehovah’s spirit will help you to
speak with kindness and love.—Galatians 5:22, 23; Colossians 4:6.

4

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Pray for help to remain calm
and to keep an open mind before discussing serious matters
with your mate
Think carefully about what you
will say and how you will say it

3
THINK AS A TEAM
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: When you get married, you
become “one ?esh” with your mate. (Matthew 19:5)
But you are still two individuals and may have di?erent
opinions. So you need to learn to be united in your
thoughts and feelings. (Philippians 2:2) Unity is essential
when making decisions. The Bible says: “By consultation,
plans will succeed.” (Proverbs 20:18) Let Bible principles
guide you as you make important decisions together.
—Proverbs 8:32, 33.

BE REALISTIC AND OPTIMISTIC
Do not expect perfection of yourself or of your mate.
(Psalm 103:14; James 3:2) Choose to focus on your mate’s
good qualities. Be con?dent that Bible principles will
work, and be patient. (2 Timothy 3:16) Jehovah will reward
your e?orts to follow his advice, and your marriage will
become stronger year by year.—Galatians 6:9.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Share your feelings with your
mate, not just information or
opinions
Consult with your mate before
making commitments

ASK YOURSELF . . .
Can my mate sense that
I care for him or her
more than myself?
What have I done today
to show love and respect to my mate?

5

2
SECTION

Be Loyal to
Each Other
“What God has yoked together,
let no man put apart.”
—Mark 10:9

Jehovah requires us to “cherish loyalty.” (Micah 6:8) This is especially important in your marriage because without loyalty, there is no trust. And trust is
essential for love to ?ourish.
Today, loyalty in marriage is under attack. To protect your marriage, you must
be determined to do two things.

1
MAKE YOUR MARRIAGE A PRIORITY
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Make sure of the more important things.” (Philippians 1:10) Your marriage is one of the
most important things in your life. It deserves priority.
Jehovah wants you to focus on your mate and “enjoy
life” together. (Ecclesiastes 9:9) He makes it clear that
you should never neglect your mate but, rather, you both
should look for ways to make each other happy. (1 Corinthians 10:24) Make your mate feel needed and appreciated.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Make sure that you regularly
spend time together, giving
your mate your undivided
attention
Think of “we” instead of “me”

7

2
SAFEGUARD YOUR HEART
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Everyone who keeps on looking
at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already
committed adultery with her in his heart.” (Matthew 5:28)
If someone keeps thinking about immoral things, in a
sense, he is being unfaithful to his mate.
Jehovah says that you need to “safeguard your heart.”
(Proverbs 4:23; Jeremiah 17:9) To do this, you must guard
your eyes. (Matthew 5:29, 30) Follow the example of the
patriarch Job, who made a covenant with his eyes never
to look with desire at another woman. (Job 31:1) Be determined never to view pornography. And be resolved to
avoid any romantic attachment to a person other than
your mate.

DO YOUR PART
Be honest with yourself, and identify your weaknesses.
(Psalm 15:2) Do not be embarrassed to ask for help.
(Proverbs 1:5) If you have immoral thoughts, keep on
?ghting them. Do not be discouraged. (Proverbs 24:16)
Jehovah will bless your e?orts to remain loyal to your
mate.
8

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Make it obvious to others that
you are completely committed
to your mate
Consider your mate’s feelings,
and immediately end any relationship that would make your
mate uncomfortable

ASK YOURSELF . . .
How can I make more
time for my mate?
Is my mate my best
friend?

How to Solve Problems
because love covers a multitude of sins.”
—1 Peter 4:8

SECTION

“Have intense love for one another,

3

As you and your mate start your life together, various problems will arise. They
may result from di?erences in how each of you thinks, feels, and approaches
life. Or problems may come from outside sources and unexpected events.
It can be tempting to avoid reality, but we are advised in the Bible to face our
problems. (Matthew 5:23, 24) You will ?nd the best solutions to your problems
by applying Bible principles.

1
DISCUSS THE PROBLEM
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “There is . . . a time to speak.”
(Ecclesiastes 3:1, 7) Make sure that you spend time talking
about the problem. Honestly let your mate know how
you feel and what you think on the subject. Always “speak
truth” with your mate. (Ephesians 4:25) Even when strong
emotions are involved, resist the urge to ?ght. A calm
answer can keep what should be a simple discussion from
escalating into a battle.—Proverbs 15:4; 26:20.
Even if you disagree, remain gracious, never forgetting
to show love and respect to your mate. (Colossians 4:6)
Try to resolve the issue as soon as possible, and do not
stop communicating.—Ephesians 4:26.

10

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Set an appropriate time to
discuss the problem
When it is your turn to listen,
resist the urge to interrupt. You
will get your turn to speak

2
LISTEN AND UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Have tender a?ection for one
another. In showing honor to one another, take the lead.”
(Romans 12:10) How you listen is very important. Try to
understand your mate’s point of view with “fellow feeling . . . and humility.” (1 Peter 3:8; James 1:19) Do not just
pretend to listen. When possible, put aside what you are
doing and give your mate your full attention, or ask if you
can discuss this later. If you think of your marriage mate
as your teammate rather than your opponent, you will
“not be quick to take o?ense.”—Ecclesiastes 7:9.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Keep listening with an open
mind, even if what you are
hearing displeases you
Listen for the message behind
the words. Notice your mate’s
body language and tone of
voice

3
FOLLOW THROUGH
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “There is bene?t in every kind of
hard work, but mere talk leads to want.” (Proverbs 14:23)
Agreeing on a good solution is not enough. You need to
follow through on what you both decide. This may involve
hard work and much e?ort, but it will be worth it. (Proverbs 10:4) If you work together as a team, you will “have
a good reward” for your hard work.—Ecclesiastes 4:9.

TACKLE PROBLEMS TOGETHER
By working together, you can ensure that your marriage
will be strong and happy rather than weak and miserable.
(Proverbs 24:3) Look to the future, and do not bring up
past problems. (Proverbs 17:9) When you cooperate with
each other and apply Bible principles, you can handle
any problem successfully.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Decide what practical steps
you will each take to solve
your problem
From time to time, evaluate
your progress

ASK YOURSELF . . .
What is the most urgent
problem that I want to
discuss with my mate?
What can I do to understand how my mate
really feels about the
problem?

4
SECTION

How to
Manage
Money
“By consultation,
plans will succeed.”
—Proverbs 20:18

We all need money to provide our families with the things they need. (Proverbs
30:8) After all, “money is a protection.” (Ecclesiastes 7:12) As a couple, it may
be di?cult to talk about money, but do not let money cause problems in your
marriage. (Ephesians 4:32) A couple should trust each other and work together
when deciding how money will be spent.

1
PLAN CAREFULLY
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Who of you wanting to build
a tower does not ?rst sit down and calculate the expense
to see if he has enough to complete it?” (Luke 14:28) It is
essential that you plan together how you will use your
money. (Amos 3:3) Decide what you need to buy and how
much you can a?ord to spend. (Proverbs 31:16) Just because you have the money to buy something does not
necessarily mean that you should. Try to avoid debt.
Spend only the money you have.—Proverbs 21:5; 22:7.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
If you have extra money at
the end of the month, decide
together what you are going to
do with it
If you have a de?cit, make
speci?c plans to reduce your
expenses. For example, you
could prepare your own meals
instead of eating out

Income

Expenses

13

2
BE OPEN AND REALISTIC
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Care for everything honestly,
not only in the sight of Jehovah but also in the sight of
men.” (2 Corinthians 8:21) Be honest with your mate
about how much you earn and spend.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Agree on an amount that
each of you can spend without
having to consult the other

Always consult your mate when making major decisions about your ?nances. (Proverbs 13:10) Communicating about money will help to maintain peace in your marriage. View your income, not as your personal money, but
as family money.—1 Timothy 5:8.

Do not wait until a problem
arises before you talk about
money

YOUR VIEW OF MONEY
Although money is important, do not allow it to disrupt
your marriage or cause unnecessary anxiety. (Matthew 6:
25-34) You do not need a lot of money to enjoy life. The
Bible says: “Guard against every sort of greed.” (Luke
12:15) Nothing that money can buy is more precious than
your marriage. So be content with what you have, and
never neglect your relationship with God. If you do this,
your family will be happy and you will have Jehovah’s
approval.—Hebrews 13:5.
14

ASK YOURSELF . . .
What can we do as
a family to stay out of
debt?
When was the last time
my mate and I openly
discussed our ?nances?

SECTION
5

How to Keep Peace
With Your Relatives
“Clothe yourselves with . . . kindness, humility,
mildness, and patience.”—Colossians 3:12

Marriage creates a new family. Though you will always love and respect your
parents, your mate is now the most important person on earth for you. This
may be di?cult for some of your relatives to accept. But Bible principles can
help you to ?nd a balance, so that you can keep peace with your relatives
as you work hard to build your new family relationship.

1
MAINTAIN A PROPER VIEW OF YOUR RELATIVES
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Honor your father and your
mother.” (Ephesians 6:2) Regardless of how old you are,
you always need to honor and respect your parents.
Recognize that your mate too, as a son or a daughter,
needs to give attention to his or her parents. “Love is not
jealous,” so never feel threatened by the relationship your
mate has with them.—1 Corinthians 13:4; Galatians 5:26.

16

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Avoid making broad statements, such as “Your family
always puts me down” or “Your
mother never likes what I do”
Try to see things from your
mate’s perspective

2
BE FIRM WHEN NECESSARY
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “A man will leave his father and
his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one ?esh.” (Genesis 2:24) When you marry, your
parents may feel that they are still responsible for you,
and they may want to be more involved in your marriage
than they should be.
It is up to you and your mate to agree on what
boundaries you will set for them and then lovingly let
them know. You can be open and direct without being
rude. (Proverbs 15:1) Humility, mildness, and patience
will help you build a warm relationship with your relatives
and continue “putting up with one another in love.”
—Ephesians 4:2.

TRY TO UNDERSTAND
It is important to understand your parents’ feelings and
their point of view. They do not mean any harm with their
involvement. They genuinely care about you. It can be
di?cult for your parents to view you and your mate as an
independent family. They may even feel abandoned. But
by following Bible principles and by having open communication, you will still be able to honor your parents without compromising your marriage.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
If you are concerned about how
much the relatives are involved
in your life, discuss it with your
mate when things are calm
Come to a mutual agreement
on how you will take care of
these matters

ASK YOURSELF . . .
Why is it natural for my
mate’s parents to be
interested in our
marriage?
How can I put my mate
?rst and, at the same
time, show respect for
my parents?

17

6
SECTION

How Babies
Change a Marriage
“Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah.”
—Psalm 127:3

The birth of a baby can be both thrilling and overwhelming for a couple. As
new parents, you may be surprised to ?nd that most of your time and energy
will be used to care for your baby. Lack of sleep along with emotional changes
can put a strain on your relationship. Both you and your mate will have to make
adjustments to care for your baby and to preserve your marriage. How can the
Bible’s advice help you to deal with these challenges?

1
UNDERSTAND HOW A BABY CHANGES YOUR LIFE
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Love is patient and kind.”
Also, love “does not look for its own interests, does not
become provoked.” (1 Corinthians 13:4, 5) As a new mother, you naturally focus your attention on your baby. However, your husband may begin to feel neglected, so do
not forget that he too needs your attention. With patience
and kindness, you can help him to feel needed and
involved in caring for your child.
“You husbands . . . continue dwelling with them according to knowledge.” (1 Peter 3:7) Understand that your wife
will spend most of her energy on your baby. She has new
responsibilities and may be stressed, exhausted, or even
depressed. At times, she may even get upset with you,
but try to remain calm, because “the one slow to anger
is better than a mighty man.” (Proverbs 16:32) Show
discernment, and give her the support she needs.
—Proverbs 14:29.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Fathers: Help your wife to care
for the baby, even at night. Limit the amount of time you spend
on other activities so that you
can spend more time with your
wife and your baby
Mothers: When your husband
o?ers to help you with the
baby, accept his help. If he
does not do the task perfectly,
do not criticize him, but kindly
show him how to do it

19

2
STRENGTHEN YOUR RELATIONSHIP
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “They will become one ?esh.”
(Genesis 2:24) Even though you have a new member in
your family, remember that you and your mate are still
“one ?esh.” Make every e?ort to keep your relationship
strong.
Wives, be grateful for your husband’s help and support. Your expressions of appreciation can be “a healing.”
(Proverbs 12:18) Husbands, tell your wife how much you
love and value her. Praise her for the way she cares for
the family.—Proverbs 31:10, 28.
“Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but
that of the other person.” (1 Corinthians 10:24) Always do
what is best for your mate. As a couple, take the time to
talk, commend, and listen to each other. Be unsel?sh
when it comes to your sexual relationship. Consider your
mate’s needs. The Bible says: “Do not deprive each other except by mutual consent.” (1 Corinthians 7:3-5) So discuss this subject honestly between the two of you. Your
patience and understanding will strengthen your
relationship.

20

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Do not forget to make time
for just the two of you
Do little things that make
your mate feel loved, such
as sending a note or giving
a small gift

3
TRAINING YOUR BABY
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “From infancy you have known
the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for
salvation.” (2 Timothy 3:15) Plan what you will do to teach
your baby. He has an amazing ability to learn, even
before he is born. While still in the womb, your baby can
recognize your voice and respond to your emotions. Read
to him when he is still an infant. Even though he may not
understand what you are reading, it can help him to enjoy
reading when he is older.
Your baby is never too young to hear you talk about
God. Let him hear you pray to Jehovah. (Deuteronomy
11:19) Even when you play together, talk about the things
that God has made. (Psalm 78:3, 4) As your child grows
up, he will sense your love for Jehovah and will learn
to love him too.

A BABY CAN HAVE A GOOD EFFECT ON A MARRIAGE
In time, you and your mate will feel comfortable and
con?dent as parents. Raising a child can make you more
loving, patient, and kind. If you work together and support each other, having a baby will make your relationship
stronger. The words of Psalm 127:3 can come true for
you: “The fruit of the womb is a reward.”

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Pray speci?cally for the wisdom
to train your baby
Repeat key words and ideas
to your baby so that he will
begin learning early

ASK YOURSELF . . .
During the last week,
what have I done to
show that I am grateful
for what my husband
or wife does for the
family?
When was the last time
I talked with my mate
about us instead of
talking only about our
baby?

7
SECTION

How to Educate
Your Child
“These words that I am commanding you today
must be on your heart, and you must inculcate
them in your sons.”—Deuteronomy 6:6, 7

When Jehovah created the family arrangement, he put parents in charge of
their children. (Colossians 3:20) It is your responsibility as a parent to train
your child to love Jehovah and to become a responsible adult. (2 Timothy 1:5;
3:15) You must also learn what is in the heart of your son or daughter. Of
course, your own example is very important. You can best teach Jehovah’s
Word to your child if you ?rst put it in your own heart.—Psalm 40:8.

1
MAKE IT EASY FOR YOUR CHILDREN TO TALK TO YOU
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Be quick to listen, slow to
speak.” (James 1:19) You want your children to feel that
they can talk to you freely. They must know that you are
ready to listen when they need to speak. Create a peaceful environment so that they will ?nd it easy to express
themselves. (James 3:18) If they think that you will be
harsh or judgmental, they may not be truly open with you.
Be patient with your children, and frequently assure them
of your love.—Matthew 3:17; 1 Corinthians 8:1.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Be available when your children
need to talk
Have conversations with your
children regularly, not just when
there are problems

2
TRY TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY REALLY MEAN
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “The one who shows insight in
a matter will ?nd success.” (Proverbs 16:20) Sometimes
you will have to look beyond your children’s words to
understand their true feelings. It is common for young
people to exaggerate or to say things they do not really
mean. “When anyone replies to a matter before he hears
the facts, it is foolish.” (Proverbs 18:13) Do not be quick
to get upset.—Proverbs 19:11.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Be resolved not to interrupt or
overreact, no matter what your
children say
Try to remember how you felt
at their age and what seemed
important to you

23

“Train a boy in the way
he should go”

3
PRESENT A UNITED FRONT
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Listen, my son, to the discipline
of your father, and do not forsake the instruction of your
mother.” (Proverbs 1:8) Jehovah has given authority over
children to both father and mother. You must teach your
children to respect and obey you. (Ephesians 6:1-3) Children can sense if their parents are not “completely united
in the same mind.” (1 Corinthians 1:10) If you disagree,
try not to do so in front of your children because this
could undermine their respect for you as parents.

24

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Discuss and agree on how you
will discipline your children
If you and your mate have
a di?erent opinion on how to
train your children, try to see
your mate’s point of view

4
HAVE A PLAN
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Train a boy in the way he
should go.” (Proverbs 22:6) Successful education of your
children will not happen by accident. You need a training
plan, which includes disciplining your children. (Psalm
127:4; Proverbs 29:17) Discipline does not simply mean
punishment, but it involves helping your children to
understand the reasons behind the rules. (Proverbs 28:7)
Also, teach them to love Jehovah’s Word and to discern
its principles. (Psalm 1:2) This will help them develop a
healthy conscience.—Hebrews 5:14.

JEHOVAH WILL REWARD YOUR EFFORTS
As a parent, you have a special assignment, to teach your
child how Jehovah thinks. (Ephesians 6:4) Jehovah knows
that this is a lot of work, but you can be sure that the outcome will bring praise to God and will give you great joy.
—Proverbs 23:24.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Make sure that your children
see God as a real Person whom
they can trust
Help them learn to identify and
avoid moral dangers, such as
those found on the Internet and
social networks. Teach them
how to avoid sexual predators

ASK YOURSELF . . .
How can I make sure
that my child can talk to
me about anything?
What can I learn from
the way other parents
are raising their
children?

25

8
SECTION

When Tragedy Strikes
“You are greatly rejoicing, though for a short time,
if it must be, you have been distressed by various trials.”
—1 Peter 1:6

Even though you try your best to have a happy marriage and family, unexpected things can happen that make it di?cult for you to keep your joy.
(Ecclesiastes 9:11) God lovingly provides help for us when we face di?culties.
If you apply the following Scriptural principles, you and your family will be
able to cope, even in the worst situations.

1
RELY ON JEHOVAH
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Throw all your anxiety on him,
because he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:7) Always remember
that God is not to blame for your trials. (James 1:13)
As you draw close to him, he will help you in the best
possible way. (Isaiah 41:10) “Pour out your hearts before
him.”—Psalm 62:8.
You will also ?nd comfort when you read and study
your Bible every day. As a result, you will experience how
Jehovah “comforts us in all our trials.” (2 Corinthians 1:
3, 4; Romans 15:4) He promises to give you “the peace of
God that surpasses all understanding.”—Philippians 4:6,
7, 13.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Pray for Jehovah’s help to stay
calm and think clearly
Review all your options and
choose the best course
available to you

2
TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF AND YOUR FAMILY
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “The heart of the understanding
one acquires knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeks to
?nd knowledge.” (Proverbs 18:15) Get all the facts. Find
out what every member of your family needs. Talk with
them. Listen to them.—Proverbs 20:5.
What if a loved one dies? Do not be afraid to express
your emotions. Remember that even Jesus “gave way to
tears.” (John 11:35; Ecclesiastes 3:4) Getting enough rest
and sleep is also important. (Ecclesiastes 4:6) This will
make it easier to cope with a distressing situation.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Before tragedy strikes, make
it a habit to communicate with
your family. When problems
arise, they will feel comfortable
talking with you
Talk to others who may have
faced a similar situation

27

3
GET THE SUPPORT YOU NEED
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “A true friend shows love at all
times, and is a brother who is born for times of distress.”
(Proverbs 17:17) Your friends want to help you, but they
may not know what to do. Do not hold back from telling
them what you really need. (Proverbs 12:25) Also, seek
spiritual help from those who understand the Bible. The
guidance they can give you from the Bible will help you.
—James 5:14.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Talk to a close friend and let
him help you
Be speci?c and honest about
your needs

You will ?nd the support you need when you regularly
associate with people who truly have faith in God and
who trust in his promises. You will also ?nd great comfort
when you help others who need encouragement. Share
your faith in Jehovah and his promises with them. Keep
busy by helping other people in need, and do not isolate
yourself from those who love you and care about you.
—Proverbs 18:1; 1 Corinthians 15:58.

THE BIGGER PICTURE
Even if you feel overwhelmed, keep your mind focused
on God. During his trials, Job said: “Let the name of
Jehovah continue to be praised.” (Job 1:21, 22) Like Job,
place Jehovah’s name and his will above your own worries. When matters do not turn out as you wish they
would have, do not give up hope. Trust God completely.
“‘I well know the thoughts that I am thinking toward you,’
declares Jehovah, ‘thoughts of peace, and not of calamity, to give you a future and a hope.’”—Jeremiah 29:11.

28

ASK YOURSELF . . .
Do I trust Jehovah
completely even in small
things?
What reasons do I have
to thank Jehovah every
day for his goodness?

“Worship the One who made the heaven
and the earth.”—Revelation 14:7

SECTION

Worship Jehovah
as a Family

9

As you have learned in this brochure, the Bible contains many principles that
will help you and your family. Jehovah wants you to be happy. He promises
that if you put his worship ?rst, “all these other things will be added to you.”
(Matthew 6:33) He really wants you to be his friend. Make use of every opportunity to cultivate your friendship with God. This is the greatest privilege a person
can have.—Matthew 22:37, 38.

1
STRENGTHEN YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH JEHOVAH
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “‘I will become a father to you,
and you will become sons and daughters to me,’ says
Jehovah.” (2 Corinthians 6:18) God wants you to become
his close friend. Prayer is one way to do this. Jehovah
invites you to “pray constantly.” (1 Thessalonians 5:17)
He is eager to hear your inner thoughts and concerns.
(Philippians 4:6) When you pray with your family, they
will see how real God is to you.

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Set aside time every day
to read the Bible and pray
As a family, give spiritual
activities priority over entertainment and relaxation

In addition to talking to God, you need to listen to him.
You can do this by studying his Word and Bible-based
publications. (Psalm 1:1, 2) Meditate on what you learn.
(Psalm 77:11, 12) Listening to God also requires that you
regularly attend Christian meetings.—Psalm 122:1-4.
Speaking to others about Jehovah is another important
way to strengthen your relationship with him. The more
you do this, the closer you will feel to him.—Matthew 28:
19, 20.

2
ENJOY YOUR FAMILY WORSHIP
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Draw close to God, and he will
draw close to you.” (James 4:8) You need to schedule and
follow through on a regular program of family worship.
(Genesis 18:19) But more is needed. God must be part of
your daily life. Strengthen your family’s relationship with
God by speaking about him “when you sit in your house
and when you walk on the road and when you lie down
and when you get up.” (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) Make it your
goal to be like Joshua, who said: “As for me and my
household, we will serve Jehovah.”—Joshua 24:15.

30

WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Have a consistent training
program that takes into account
the needs of each member of
your family

A NOTE TO FAMILY HEADS
Allow nothing to interfere
with your family worship
Ahead of time, let your
family know what will be
discussed so that they
can prepare
Make sure that each
family member is present
Create a peaceful
atmosphere that all
will enjoy

HAPPY SERVANTS OF JEHOVAH
There is nothing better than worshipping Jehovah God.
He is delighted to see you and your family sincerely
serving him. As you do this, you will come to love and
imitate Jehovah more and more. (Mark 12:30; Ephesians
5:1) Having God in your marriage makes your bond with
your mate stronger. (Ecclesiastes 4:12; Isaiah 48:17) You
and your family can be happy forever, knowing that
“Jehovah your God has blessed you.”—Deuteronomy 12:7.

ASK YOURSELF . . .
When was the last time
we prayed together as
a couple?
What can I study with
my family that will
strengthen our faith in
Jehovah?

31

Find More Help
for Families at

jw.org

>

Treating your mate with respect
·····················································································

How to avoid hurtful speech
·····················································································

How to stop arguing
·····················································································

How to forgive
·····················································································

For additional practical advice
and wisdom from God’s Word,
please visit our Web site.
There you will also ?nd real-life
experiences of married people
like you from around the world.

When a friendship gets too close
·····················································································

When a spouse has special needs
·····················································································

Making a second marriage work
·····················································································

How to deal with tantrums
·····················································································

When your child is disabled
·····················································································

Talk to your children about sex
·····················································································

When your adolescent questions your faith
·····················································································

Preparing teens for adulthood
·····················································································

When your teenager self-injures
·····················································································

Dealing with those outside your stepfamily
·····················································································
New subjects are regularly added.

Visit jw.org,
or scan code
hf-E
140212

O?cial Web site of
Jehovah’s Witnesses

