How Can You Have
a Happy Life?

CONTENTS
WHO ARE
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES?
? Our name comes from the Scriptures:
“ ‘You are my witnesses,’ is the utterance of Jehovah.”—Isaiah 43:10.
? In more than 230 lands and in some
630 languages, we bear witness about
the true God and his loving purpose for
mankind as set out in the Scriptures.
? We are not part of Christendom’s
churches; nor are we part of Judaism
or Islam.
? We do not ask for money.
? We recognize that religious matters
are sensitive and personal and that each
individual must do his own thinking on
religious questions.

5 2013
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
June 2013 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part
of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by
voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are
from the modern-language New World Translation of
the Holy Scriptures—With References. Scripture citations
in brackets indicate verse numbering according to
Tanakh, A New Translation of the Holy Scriptures According
to the Traditional Hebrew Text. For example: Psalm 46:9
[46:10, TNK ].
Photo Credits: Page 3, jets: Courtesy of the Ministry of Defense, London;
flood victims: 5 G.M.B. Akash/Panos Pictures; page 5: grapes: 5 ollirg/age
fotostock; page 6: NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage (STScI/AURA)-ESA/
Hubble Collaboration; page 7: 5 Focus Database/age fotostock; page 8:
Shrine of the Book, Photo 5 The Israel Museum, Jerusalem; Qumran Cave 4:
Todd Bolen/BiblePlaces.com; page 9: 5 Kurt and Rosalia Scholz/SuperStock

How Can You Have a Happy Life? English (hl-E)
Made in the United States of America

SECTION

Will We Ever Enjoy Real Happiness?

1

What Do We Need to Be Happy?

2

Who Can Give Us Reliable Guidance?

3

What Guidance Has God Given Us?

4

How Can God’s Guidance Bring Us
Happiness Now?

5

How Can We Make God a Bigger Part
of Our Life?

6

What Hope Do We Have for Future
Happiness?

7

What Was God’s Original Purpose
for Man?

8

What Is Sin?

9

How Does Sin Affect Our Relationship
With God?

10

What Has God Been Doing to Help Us?

11

Why Did God Provide the Torah?

12

Why Did the Law Require Sacrifices?

13

Why Do We Need a Better Sacrifice?

14

What Do the Scriptures Say About
the Messiah?

15

When Will God’s Promises Come True?

16

Will the Messiah Really Remove All Evil?

17

What Blessings Will the Messiah Bring?

18

How Far Will the Messiah’s Rule Extend?

19

How Can We Be Part of God’s Purpose?

20

1

Will We Ever Enjoy
Real Happiness?
“The meek ones themselves will possess the earth,
and they will indeed find their exquisite delight
in the abundance of peace.”—PSALM 37:11.

EVERYONE wants to be happy. But
many problems threaten our personal and family happiness, including armed con?ict. A resident of
the Middle East put it this way, “It
is always the day before a war, a
war, or the day after a war.”
What do you think? Is life today
the way it should be?
The current state of human society is in many ways contrary to
our natural desire for a peaceful,
secure, and happy life.
Must things always be this way?
The Scriptures show how we can
enjoy a happier life now and in the
future.

2

What Do We Need
to Be Happy?
“They will actually sit, each one under his vine and
under his fig tree, and there will be no one making
them tremble.”—MICAH 4:4.

BASICALLY, the requirements for
a happy life are few and simple:
? Peace and security
? Loving family and friends
? Good health
? Adequate food, clothing,
and shelter
? Purpose in life
? Hope for the future

For many people, some or all of these requirements are hard to meet. The Scriptures provide realistic and practical guidance that can help us make
the best of our circumstances, whatever they may
be. More important, the Scriptures provide a foundation for con?dence that the conditions on earth
will be much better in the near future. Indeed, future conditions will be as God intended them to be.

What Do the Scriptures Say About Our Basic Needs?

Peace and security

Physical provisions

Hope for the future

“He is making wars to
cease to the extremity
of the earth.”

“They will certainly
build houses and have
occupancy; and they
will certainly plant
vineyards and eat
their fruitage.”

“ ‘For I myself well
know the thoughts
that I am thinking
toward you,’ is the
utterance of Jehovah,
‘thoughts of peace,
and not of calamity,
to give you a future
and a hope.’ ”

—PSALM 46:9 [46:10, TNK ].

—ISAIAH 65:21.

—JEREMIAH 29:11.

Are people happier now that they have more?
Psychiatrist Viktor E. Frankl noted: “Ever more people today have the means to live, but no meaning to live for.” The
Scriptures long ago showed that pursuing riches and pleasures without having a deeper purpose in life is empty and
unsatisfying. “A mere lover of silver will not be satis?ed with
silver, neither any lover of wealth with income. This too is
vanity.” (Ecclesiastes 5:10 [5:9, TNK]) The a?uent may seem
to enjoy a life of ease and pleasure-seeking, but “even in
laughter the heart may be in pain.”—Proverbs 14:13.
Who can show us how to lead a truly meaningful life?

3

Who Can Give Us
Reliable Guidance?
“Send out your light and your truth. May these themselves
lead me.”—PSALM 43:3.

WHEN we want to know how to use a
piece of equipment, we count on the manufacturer to provide authoritative instructions. Similarly, would not our Creator be
in the best position to tell us how we can
be truly happy?
How do we even know that there
is a Creator?
Professor George Zinsmeister, formerly
of the University of Massachusetts in the
United States, believes in God and answers
this question in a single word—entropy. He
“The heavens are declaring the glory of God”

is referring to what scientists term “the second law of thermodynamics.” This law implies something that we all observe. An orderly system, such as a house, cannot
come into existence on its own. Yet, our
universe consists of countless examples of
highly ordered physical and biological systems. All of this is evidence that points to
an unimaginably intelligent and powerful
Creator.
King David drew this conclusion thousands of years ago: “The heavens are de-

municate and enjoy a meaningful relationship.
What is God’s purpose for human
society?
God intends for us to use our abilities
to work together as a united family for the
common good of mankind.—Micah 4:3.

An orderly system, such as a house,
cannot come into existence on its own

claring the glory of God; and of the work
of his hands the expanse is telling.” (Psalm
19:1 [19:2, TNK]) In another psalm we
?nd the exclamation: “How many your
works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of
your productions.”—Psalm 104:24.1
Why did God create us?
Creation was an expression of God’s
love. As a loving Father, he wants us to enjoy life and to ?nd pleasure in all the good
things he has created for us.—Psalm 92:4
[92:5, TNK].
What does it mean that God created us
“in his image”?—Genesis 1:26, 27.
God created us with a measure of his
own qualities, including the ability to love,
to be wise, to be just, and to be creative.
He also gave us freedom of choice. When
we choose to re?ect his qualities, we make
him happy. (Proverbs 23:15) As does any
parent, God desires to have intelligent, reasoning children with whom he can com1 For further discussion of God’s existence, see the book
Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

What could we expect our Creator to do
for us?
A good father guides and instructs his
children. Reasonably, our Creator would
do the same. Has he done so?

How Much
Does God Care
About Us?
Consider just two of God’s
many expressions of care for us:
“You will certainly call me and
come and pray to me, and I will
listen to you.”—JEREMIAH 29:12.
“Do not be afraid, for I am with
you. Do not gaze about, for I am
your God. I will fortify you. I will
really help you. I will really keep
fast hold of you with my right
hand of righteousness. . . . For I,
Jehovah your God, am grasping
your right hand, the One saying
to you, ‘Do not be afraid. I myself
will help you.’ ”—ISAIAH 41:10, 13.

4

What Guidance Has
God Given Us?
“I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you
to benefit yourself.”—ISAIAH 48:17.

THE Scriptures are a gift from God. He inspired faithful men of the nation of Israel to write down his own thoughts. King
David, who wrote many of the psalms, acknowledged: “The spirit of Jehovah it was
that spoke by me, and his word was upon
my tongue.”—2 Samuel 23:2.
What was God’s purpose in giving us
the Scriptures?
The Scriptures not only explain our history and describe our future but also give
us the answers to life’s most important
questions: Why are we here? How can we
have a truly happy future? We can know
the answers only because our Creator,
in his concern for us, has revealed them

through the Scriptures, which say of God
and his laws:
“Jehovah himself gives wisdom . . . you
will understand righteousness and judgment and uprightness, the entire course of
what is good.”—Proverbs 2:6, 9.
“The law of Jehovah is perfect, bringing
back the soul. The reminder of Jehovah is
trustworthy, making the inexperienced one
wise. The orders from Jehovah are upright,
causing the heart to rejoice; the commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the
eyes shine.”—Psalm 19:7, 8 [19:8, 9, TNK].
Clearly, in large part, God gave us the
Scriptures to enable us to have a happy
life.

Dead Sea Scroll of Isaiah

Qumran Cave 4, where the
largest cache of Dead Sea
Scroll fragments was found

Babylon today

Copyists used extreme care

How do we know that our copies of the
Scriptures are authentic?
From ancient times, such devoted men
as Ezra, “a skilled copyist in the law of
Moses,” exercised extreme care in order to
preserve the text of the Scriptures. (Ezra
7:6) The Dead Sea Scrolls are an outstanding example of the success of their e?orts.
These scrolls were discovered in caves near
Qumran, beginning in 1947. They include
fragments of nearly all the books of the
Hebrew Scriptures. Although the scrolls
were written more than 2,000 years ago,
they di?er very little from one another and
from the traditional Hebrew text in use today. “None of these variations a?ects the
scriptural message itself,” notes Dead Sea
Scrolls scholar Geza Vermes. Such accurate transmission provides evidence that
our copies of the Scriptures faithfully represent the inspired originals.
Do prophecies really come true?
After entering the land that God had
promised Israel, Joshua reminded them:

“Not one word out of all the good words
that Jehovah your God has spoken to you
has failed.” (Joshua 23:14) That statement
has always proved true. Why? Because
God can make matters work out according
to his will. Thus, his prophecies come true
down to the last detail.
For example, God foretold Israel’s release from Babylon, as well as that city’s
eventual desolation. Isaiah wrote that Babylon “must become as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. She will never be inhabited.” (Isaiah 13:19, 20) From
that time through the end of the Second Temple period, Babylon was still a
populated city. But within a few centuries, long after the Dead Sea Scroll
of Isaiah was written, Babylon had become what it remains today—uninhabited.
—Isaiah 13:21.1
1 For further information, see pages 27-29 of the brochure A Book for All People, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

5

How Can God’s Guidance
Bring Us Happiness Now?
“O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments!
Then your peace would become just like a river, and your
righteousness like the waves of the sea.”—ISAIAH 48:18.

FEW things are closer to our hearts than our family. Yet, too often family happiness is disturbed by
disagreements and tension.
What Scriptural principles help families?
The standards and principles of human relations in the Scriptures are practical, eternal, and
universal. When families apply them, homelife improves. Consider the importance of love, respect,
and communication. How much happier many
families would be if each member always applied
the principle: “You must love your fellow as yourself ”! (Leviticus 19:18) How much happier many
marriages would be if mates respected each other
and communicated freely and considerately, as did
Elkanah and Hannah!—1 Samuel 1:8.

Applying Scriptural principles
improves marriages

What is the best way to raise your children?
Parents have the privilege and the responsibility
to teach God’s ways to their own children. “These
words . . . must prove to be on your heart; and you
must inculcate them in your son.” (Deuteronomy
6:6, 7) To be able to do this, parents themselves
need to know the holy writings. When they make
the e?ort to learn “these words” and to teach
them to their children, the results will be good.
“Train up a boy according to the way for him; even
when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”
—Proverbs 22:6.
Teaching children God’s ways
brings good results

Do Scriptural principles really work?
Yehoshua and Malka: “We had ?ve children to raise, and our ?nancial state was
not that good. But putting spiritual pursuits ahead of material ones helped us to
keep a balanced view of money. We experienced the truth of David’s words: ‘I have
not seen anyone righteous left entirely, nor
his o?spring looking for bread.’ (Psalm 37:
25) We avoided unnecessary expenses and
did not strive to attain material wealth,
knowing that ‘without fail it makes wings
for itself like those of an eagle and ?ies
away toward the heavens.’ (Proverbs 23:4,
5) Thus, we had more time to spend together as a family in spiritual activities and
also picnicking and enjoying nature.
“Malka and I always tried to put our
trust in Jehovah God and to lean on his
wisdom, not our own. We taught our children to choose friends who were a good in?uence, since ‘he that is walking with wise
persons will become wise, but he that is
having dealings with the stupid ones will
fare badly.’ (Proverbs 13:20) Today, our
children live happy, purposeful lives. When
we look back on our e?orts to raise them
in God’s ways, we are convinced that he
helped us. We can say with all our heart:
‘The blessing of Jehovah—that is what
makes rich, and he adds no pain with it.’ ”
—Proverbs 10:22.

Mordechai and Keren: “When our oldest son was small, air-raid alarms often
sent us dashing into a bomb shelter that
was sealed against gas attacks. In the shelter, as at other times, we prayed as a family to the ‘Hearer of prayer’ for the courage not to be overwhelmed by anxiety.
(Psalm 65:2 [65:3, TNK]) Later, as our
boys were growing up, we taught them
scriptures that show how well God looks
after those who love him. (Deuteronomy
7:9) We often talked about God’s promise
of a peaceful future. Praying to God and
re?ecting on the Scriptures calmed us and
helped us to avoid feeling traumatized.
“Of course, siblings at times may argue.
When our children did, we reminded them
that God wants us, not to get even, but to
do good. ‘Hatred is what stirs up contentions, but love covers over even all transgressions.’ (Proverbs 10:12) This helped
them to break the cycle of anger. They also
learned to show older people respect and
to care for them according to the principle of Leviticus 19:32: ‘Before gray hair you
should rise up, and you must show consideration for the person of an old man, and
you must be in fear of your God.’ We are
grateful that both of our boys have grown
into con?dent, good-hearted young men.”

6

How Can We Make God
a Bigger Part of Our Life?
“Not by bread alone does man live but by every expression
of Jehovah’s mouth.”—DEUTERONOMY 8:3.

IN ORDER for us to make God a bigger
part of our life, we need to learn what
he has revealed about himself through the
Scriptures. But there is more to knowing
God than merely learning about him. We
need to know him as a Person.
Is knowing God beyond human ability?
God himself makes it possible for us to
know him. King David told his son Solomon: “Know the God of your father . . . If
you search for him, he will let himself be
found by you.” (1 Chronicles 28:9) Many
such expressions in the Scriptures show
that a close relationship with God is possible and very desirable. God wants to have
that kind of relationship with us. Because
of Abraham’s faith, God referred to him
as “my friend.” (Isaiah 41:8) If we show
faith and respond to God’s direction, he
will bless, protect, and help us too.
Why should we pray from the heart?
When we pray, God listens. “The desire
of the meek ones you will certainly hear,
O Jehovah. . . . You will pay attention with
your ear.” (Psalm 10:17) Rather than simply reciting a written or memorized prayer,
we should do as the Scriptures tell us: “Before him pour out your heart.” (Psalm 62:8

[62:9, TNK]) We should feel free to ‘draw
near’ to him as our beloved Father, openly expressing any and all concerns. “The
prayer of the upright ones is a pleasure to
him.”—Psalm 73:28; Proverbs 15:8; Isaiah
64:8 [64:7, TNK].

“Before him pour out your heart,”
as David did

7

What Hope Do We Have for
Future Happiness?
“Happy is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the
wicked ones, . . . but his delight is in the law of Jehovah, . . .
And everything he does will succeed.”—PSALM 1:1-3.

THROUGHOUT the ages, thinking people
have asked, “What does the future hold for
us and for all mankind?”
Why must the answer involve God?
Only God can tell us about our future,
and he has done so. We can count on what
he tells us. He says: “My word that goes
forth from my mouth . . . will not return to
me without results.”—Isaiah 55:11.
Does God expect us to solve our
own problems?
Histor y shows that man’s e?orts to
live without God’s guidance have not resulted in happiness. Why not? We were not
created to live independent of God, any
more than small children can live successfully without their parents’ guidance. The
prophet Jeremiah acknowledged: “It does
not belong to man who is walking even to
direct his step.”—Jeremiah 10:23.
Of course, God expects us to do our best
to cope with life’s challenges, but many
of them are beyond our ability to resolve.
That is why he wants us to rely on him, not
on ourselves. When we do, the outcome
will be good. “In all your ways take notice
of [God], and he himself will make your
paths straight.”—Proverbs 3:6.

Does God Intend
for Each of Us
to Understand
the Scriptures?
God’s command that we teach his
words to our children shows that we
can understand and apply the Scriptures. How else could God expect us to
carry out that command?—Deuteronomy 6:6, 7.
In fact, when Moses gave the Law
to the nation of Israel, he said: “This
commandment that I am commanding
you today is not too di?cult for you . . .
The word is very near you, in your own
mouth and in your own heart, that you
may do it.”—Deuteronomy 30:11, 14.
Therefore, each of us needs to make
the e?ort to understand God’s written
Word. It is the highest spiritual authority today, just as it was in the past.
Reading “the book of Jehovah’s law by
the hand of Moses” moved good
King Josiah to “carry out the words of
the law that were written in the book.”
(2 Chronicles 34:14, 21; 2 Kings 23:24)
Because Josiah did so, God blessed him.

8

What Was God’s Original
Purpose for Man?
“Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth.”
—GENESIS 1:28.

GOD created Adam and Eve to live a happy life on earth and to take care of their
beautiful home. (Genesis 2:15) He endowed them with a measure of his own
qualities. The ?rst man and woman could
explore the entire planet and enjoy everything on it. Their o?spring would be born
into perfect conditions.

What opportunity did God give the ?rst
human couple?
God gave our ?rst parents the opportunity to live forever in Paradise, where they
could spend an eternity getting to know
him and his works better. (Psalm 115:16;
Ecclesiastes 3:10, 11) Adam and Eve could
pass on the same opportunity to their o?spring.

What guidelines did God give to Adam
and Eve?
Adam and Eve were free to enjoy life as
part of God’s universal family, as long as
they respected their Creator’s standards
of good and bad. He told them how best
to use their freedom and warned them
of the consequences of disobeying: If they
lived according to God’s instructions,
they would enjoy perfect life forever; if
they chose their own way, they would suffer and lose their lives. Whenever we have
freedom of choice, we bear responsibility
for our decisions and actions.—Genesis 2:
16, 17.

What went wrong?
First, Satan rebelled against God. Then,
Adam and Eve decided to follow Satan. As
a result, they sinned against God, lost their
perfection, and began to die.—Genesis 5:5.
How did Adam and Eve’s actions
a?ect us?
After Adam and Eve sinned, they could
no longer pass on perfection and the prospect of everlasting life to their o?spring.
Thus, they brought sin and death into the
world. Contrary to God’s original purpose, we all die because of sin. But what is
sin?

Who Is Satan?
Before God created the
earth and man, he created
angels. (Job 38:4, 7) One of
those angels became “Satan”
—meaning “Resister”—when
he tried to take over the rulership of mankind. He did
not challenge God’s power
but, rather, God’s right to
rule.
What is Satan’s aim?
Satan wants to bring all
people under his own rule.
He accused God of lying, and
he told Eve that she and
Adam would be better o? de-

ciding for themselves what
was good and what was bad.
—Genesis 3:4, 5.
What has Satan achieved?
By listening to Satan,
Adam and Eve put themselves under Satan’s rule and
severed their relationship
with God. Were they better
o? afterward? Since then,
has mankind bene?ted from
trying to live independent of
God? Does mankind today
enjoy perfect life in Paradise,
as God originally purposed?

9

What Is Sin?
“There is no man righteous in the earth that keeps doing good
and does not sin.”—ECCLESIASTES 7:20.

A GOOD person wants to think, feel, and act properly at all
times. Sin means failing to achieve that goal perfectly. It is like
missing the mark when throwing darts.
Does sin include only serious crime?
Any bad action, feeling, or thought is a sin. That includes
such things as uncontrolled anger, cursing at one’s mate or children, nurturing a wrong desire, or giving in to a sel?sh impulse.
Could anyone go through life without ever sinning?
Can anyone honestly say, for example, that he has never violated the tenth commandment: “You must not desire . . .
anything that belongs to your fellowman”? (Exodus 20:17
[20:14, TNK]) Realistically, we know that “there is no man
that does not sin.” (1 Kings 8:46) Completely avoiding all sin,
even for a day, is beyond our ability.
How deep-seated is sin?
Our inability to avoid error shows that sin is a deeper problem than simply committing wrong acts. We all inherit sin. We
get sick, grow old, and die, not because we choose to do bad
deeds, but primarily because we are born imperfect, inclined
to error. We cannot rid ourselves of this inclination by our
own e?orts. “Who can produce someone clean out of someone unclean? There is not one.”—Job 14:4.
Adam and Eve were created perfect—not inclined to error.
When they chose to sin, they became like a dented cake pan
that could produce only a dented cake. Thus, we have no
choice in the matter. We all carry a dent like theirs—various
imperfections and wrong inclinations. In a word, the sin we
inherited from Adam and Eve. But does that really matter?

Do you ever lose your
temper?

Do you ever have a bad
thought?

10

How Does Sin Affect Our
Relationship With God?
“You are not a God taking delight in wickedness; no one bad
may reside for any time with you.”—PSALM 5:4 [5:5, TNK].

BY SINNING, Adam and Eve severed their
relationship with God. So too our sin separates us from God. “The very errors of you
people have become the things causing
division between you and your God, and
your own sins have caused the concealing
of his face from you to keep from hearing.”
—Isaiah 59:2.
When Adam and Eve rebelled, did God
abandon his original purpose?
God has never abandoned his purpose.
He still wants the earth to be a paradise, inhabited by happy people. Nothing can prevent Almighty God from reaching his objective. “God is not a man that

he should tell lies, neither a son of mankind that he should feel regret. Has he himself said it and will he not do it, and has
he spoken and will he not carry it out?”
—Numbers 23:19.
How does God feel about
our plight?
Just as a caring human father feels pain
when his children su?er—even for their
own mistakes—it distresses God to see us
su?er. (Isaiah 63:9) God feels deeply for
us, and he promises that he will eventually remove all evil from the earth. But how,
and when?
Sin separated Adam and Eve from God

11

What Has God Been
Doing to Help Us?
“I shall put enmity between you and the woman and between
your seed and her seed. He will bruise you in the head and you
will bruise him in the heel.”—GENESIS 3:15.

GOD has been taking steps to ensure that
rebellion against him will never occur
again.
When did God begin to deal with the
situation in Eden?
Immediately after Adam and Eve sinned,
God passed sentence on the guilty parties.
He also revealed his purpose to undo the
damage they had caused.

What issue was raised?
As mentioned earlier, Satan did not
question God’s power but, rather, God’s
right to rule. Satan wants to rule God’s
children.
How is this situation like a court case?
Suppose one of your relatives has no
children and wants to gain custody of
yours. He takes you to court and accus-

In a serious court case, it takes time to resolve the issues

es you of neglecting and misguiding your
children. To settle the issue and clear your
name, you will have to present evidence.
Your children will have to testify too. Similarly, Satan accuses God of lying and all
humans of serving Him out of sel?sh interest.—Genesis 3:4, 5; Job 1:9-11; 2:4, 5.
Why is the case taking so long?
In a serious court case, it takes time to
resolve the issues. But God’s ?nal judgment will set a universal and eternal precedent that will sanctify God’s name and
vindicate his way of ruling. And God will
completely undo all the damage that Satan
caused, just as He did in Job’s case.—Job
42:10.

Why Is God’s Name
Holy?
God’s name—Jehovah (565
)—represents God himself. Regarding his name,
God said: “This is my name to time inde?nite, and this is the memorial of me
to generation after generation.” (Exodus
3:15) The meaning of God’s name—“He
Causes to Become”—guarantees that he
will become whatever he needs to become to achieve his purpose. He demonstrated this ability when he delivered Israel from Egypt, the most powerful
nation of the day.—Exodus 9:16.
How should we regard God’s name?
The third commandment is: “You must
not take up the name of Jehovah your
God in a worthless way.” (Exodus 20:7)
No one should pronounce his name in
an empty or a disrespectful way. All
those who bear God’s name are obligated to praise him by their conduct, never
dishonoring his holy name.
Should we ever pronounce God’s name?
The Scriptures tell those who fear God
to use his name but never to misuse it.
“Give thanks to Jehovah, call upon his
name.” (Psalm 105:1) Faithful ones, such
as Boaz, pronounced God’s name respectfully in worship and in daily life.
—Ruth 2:4.

12

Why Did God Provide
the Torah?
“A law he set in Israel . . . that they might set their confidence
in God himself.”—PSALM 78:5, 7.

JEHOVAH provided the Torah as part of
the long-range purpose that he set out in
Eden—to restore and bless the entire human family.
What laws did God give before the Law
given to Moses?
God prohibited murder and the eating
of blood, among other directives. (Genesis 9:3-5) These decrees emphasize the sacredness of life and are binding on all mankind, Noah’s descendants.
Where does Abraham ?t into God’s
purpose?
God told faithful Abraham: “By means
of your seed [one of his descendants] all
nations of the earth will certainly bless
themselves.” (Genesis 22:18) God would
use that “seed” to ful?ll his purpose.
How does the Law ?t into God’s
purpose?
In connection with the Law given to
Moses, God made a covenant with the nation of Israel. By keeping that covenant, Israel would become “a kingdom of priests
and a holy nation.”—Exodus 19:5, 6.
How did the Law bene?t all mankind?
God used the nation of Israel as an example of the blessings that result from

The Law given to Moses advanced
God’s purpose

supporting his rulership. God’s Law was
designed to guide and protect Israel, in order for them to become “a light of the nations.” (Isaiah 42:6) For Israel to become
such a blessing, they needed to follow
God’s written Law.—Deuteronomy 11:
26, 27.
How could a nation of imperfect people
carry out God’s Law perfectly?
Despite their best intentions, imperfect people would always fall short, even
as Moses did. (Numbers 12:3; 20:10-12)
Nevertheless, God preserved ancient Israel
in order to ful?ll his purpose.

13

Why Did the Law Require
Sacrifices?
“The soul of the flesh is in the blood, and I myself have
put it upon the altar for you to make atonement for
your souls.”—LEVITICUS 17:11.

GOD made provision for individuals and
for the nation as a whole to atone for their
sins by means of sacri?ces, or o?erings.
According to the Law, anyone committing
a sin had to rectify the wrong and then
present to Jehovah an appropriate o?ering. Various sins required speci?c o?erings, and these provided a measure of relief from guilt.—Leviticus 5:5-7.
On one day each year—Yom Kippur—the
high priest entered the Most Holy of
the temple with the blood of sacri?ces
made for his own sins and for those of
the people. (Leviticus 16:11, 14, 15) This
and the other ceremonies on that day
gave everyone a feeling of relief from the
accumulated burden of guilt for all the
past year’s sins. Without pouring out the
blood of the sacri?cial animal, no forgiveness could take place “because it is the
blood that makes atonement.”—Leviticus
16:30; 17:11.
Why does God not just forgive us
outright?
Jehovah is willing to forgive “in a large
way.” (Isaiah 55:7) But he will never rescind his moral laws. Since God respects
his own perfect standards, he cannot simply ignore our imperfections and sins.

“The Rock, perfect is his activity, for all
his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness,
with whom there is no injustice; righteous
and upright is he.”—Deuteronomy 32:4.
Ask yourself: ‘What would happen to
society if the authorities just pardoned
all criminals and released them from jail?
What would happen to the entire universe if God suddenly rescinded his physical laws, such as the law of gravity?’ His
moral laws are equally important.
So if no imperfect human could carry
out the Law perfectly, what kind of sacri?ce is needed to cover our sins?
Sacri?ces provided relief from guilt

14

Why Do We Need a Better
Sacrifice?
“Not one of them can by any means redeem even a brother . . .
that he should still live forever.”—PSALM 49:7, 9 [49:8, 10, TNK].

Could anyone today o?er the sacri?ces
required by the Law?
Since the temple and priesthood no longer exist, it is not possible to o?er the sacri?ces required by the Law for the atonement of sins. But God has not left us
without hope. The Scriptures point to a
permanent solution, “a new covenant,” by
means of which Jehovah promises: “I shall
forgive their error, and their sin I shall remember no more.” By means of this “new covenant,” God provides the basis for forgiving
all of our sins forever.—Jeremiah 31:31-34.
How did Adam’s sin a?ect us?
When Adam rebelled against God, he
lost the prospect of endless life. (Genesis 3:
17-19) As our common progenitor, Adam
could pass on to us only imperfection and
death. In e?ect, he is responsible for the
death of all his children.
If a criminal deliberately murdered
someone you love, could he satisfy
justice by sacri?cing a bull?
The Law did not permit making an animal sacri?ce for willful murder. (Numbers
35:31) No animal’s life is worth as much as
a man’s. The sinner would have to pay with
his own life.

So, then, what kind of sacri?ce could
cover Adam’s sin so that Jehovah
could forgive people and ‘remember
their sins no more’?
An equal exchange is required—‘soul
for soul,’ that is, life for life. (Deuteronomy 19:21) Nothing less than a perfect
human life—like Adam’s life before he
sinned—could balance the scales of justice. Only someone with such a perfect life,
uncontaminated by sin inherited from Adam, could
provide the atoning sacri?ce. (Psalm 49:7-9 [49:810, TNK]) Only God could
produce such a perfect life,
without a human father,
as He did when he created
Adam.—Genesis 2:7.
Who alone could present
himself as an atoning sacri?ce?
Only the Messiah could be the atoning
sacri?ce. He will indeed come as a Deliverer. (Genesis 3:15; Psalm 2:2, 8) But ?rst, he
must provide a perfect “guilt o?ering”—a
complete covering for our sins, both inherited and committed.—Leviticus 7:1; Isaiah
53:6, 10.
What else do the Scriptures say about
the Messiah and his role?

15

What Do the Scriptures Say
About the Messiah?
“A prophet I shall raise up for them from the midst of their
brothers, like you.”—DEUTERONOMY 18:18.

GOD progressively revealed details about
the Messiah’s origin and role. Consider a
sampling:
What did God promise Abraham about
the Messiah?
God told faithful Abraham that the
Messiah—the promised “seed”— would be
one of his descendants. “By means of your
seed all nations of the earth will certainly bless themselves due to the fact that
you have listened to my voice.”—Genesis
22:18.
What did God tell Isaac?
God reiterated to Isaac the promise He
had made to Abraham: “I will carry out
the sworn statement that I swore to Abraham your father, ‘. . . by means of your
seed all nations of the earth will certainly
bless themselves.’ ”—Genesis 26:3, 4.
What did Moses say about the
Messiah?
When Israel was about to enter the
Land of Promise, Moses told the nation:
“A prophet from your own midst, from
your brothers, like me, is what Jehovah
your God will raise up for you—to him
you people should listen.”—Deuteronomy
18:15.

What did God promise David
about the Messiah?
“I shall certainly raise up your seed after
you, which will come out of your inward
parts; and I shall indeed ?rmly establish his
kingdom. . . . Your very throne will become
one ?rmly established to time inde?nite.”
—2 Samuel 7:12, 16.
“I myself shall place him as ?rstborn, the
most high of the kings of the earth. To time
inde?nite I shall preserve my loving-kindness
toward him, and my covenant will be faithful to him. And I shall certainly set up his
seed forever and his throne as the days of
heaven.”—Psalm 89:27-29 [89:28-30, TNK].
How did the prophet Jeremiah
con?rm these promises?
“ ‘I shall make sprout for David a righteous sprout,’ . . . for this is what Jehovah
has said, ‘There will not be cut o? in David’s case a man to sit upon the throne of
the house of Israel.’ ”—Jeremiah 33:15, 17.
What would the Messiah be like?
“Upon him the spirit of Jehovah must
settle down, the spirit of wisdom and of
understanding, the spirit of counsel and of
mightiness, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of Jehovah . . . And with righteousness he must judge the lowly ones, and

with uprightness he must give reproof in
behalf of the meek ones of the earth. . . .
To him even the nations will turn inquiringly.”—Isaiah 11:1, 2, 4, 10.
Where would the Messiah be born?
“You, O Bethlehem Ephrathah, the one
too little to get to be among the thousands of Judah, from you there will come
out to me the one who is to become ruler
in Israel, whose origin is from early times,
from the days of time inde?nite.”—Micah
5:2 [5:1, TNK].
When would the Messiah arrive?
“There are seventy weeks that have been
determined . . . From the going forth of the
word to restore and to rebuild Jerusalem
until Messiah the Leader, there will be seven weeks, also sixty-two weeks. . . . After
the sixty-two weeks Messiah will be cut o?,
with nothing for himself. And the city and
the holy place the people of a leader that is
coming will bring to their ruin. . . . And until the end there will be war.” (Daniel 9:2426) Thus, it was foretold that the Messiah was to appear before the destruction of
the Second Temple.

The “seventy weeks” of years—490
years—began in 455 B.C.E., the year that
Persian King Artaxerxes gave Nehemiah the
commission to restore and rebuild Jerusalem. The 69 weeks “until Messiah the Leader” ended in 29 C.E.1
Why would the Messiah have to die?
Isaiah foretold that the Messiah would
be rejected, “severed from the land of the
living ones,” and his life would serve “as
a guilt o?ering.” He would “bring a righteous standing to many people; and their
errors he himself [would] bear.” (Isaiah
52:13–53:12; Leviticus 7:1) He would provide the sacri?ce “to ?nish o? sin, and to
make atonement for error.”—Daniel 9:24.
How would the Messiah “cause sacri?ce
and gift o?ering to cease”?
—Daniel 9:27.
After the Messiah’s perfect sacri?ce,
other sacri?ces would no longer be needed nor mandated by God. That is why God
could allow the temple to be destroyed
and its sacri?ces to cease.
1 See Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 2, pages 899-904,
published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

A Time Line of Messianic Prophecies

David anointed
as king

Abraham enters
Promised Land

1943 B.C.E.

2000 B.C.E.

1077 B.C.E.

1858 B.C.E.

1513 B.C.E.

Jacob born

Moses receives the Law

1026 B.C.E.
First Temple
inaugurated

What Do You Think?
Over time, many have
claimed to be the Messiah
or have been hailed as the
Messiah by their followers.
Has anyone ever ?t the
prophetic picture?
Many people thought Jesus
did so, since he appeared at
the right time and place and
was a descendant of David.
(Matthew 1:6, 16; Luke 2:
4-7) Despite the negative
image his name evokes for
some, it is instructive to consider what he said and did.

What did he really teach?
He never claimed to be
God, but said: “The Father
is greater than I am.”—John
14:28.
The principles he taught
were all in line with the
Hebrew Scriptures. He said:
“Do not think I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I came, not to destroy,
but to ful?ll; for truly I say
to you that sooner would
heaven and earth pass away
than for one smallest letter
or one particle of a letter to

Isaiah prophesies

Second Temple inaugurated

c. 778-732 B.C.E.

515 B.C.E.
Daniel prophesies

pass away from the Law.”
—Matthew 5:17, 18.
He would never have approved the shocking things
that Christendom’s churches
have taught and done—supposedly in his name.
He was fair and honest
as well as kind to women,
children, and the sick. He
defended the poor and the
oppressed.
People of all kinds were
drawn to his good qualities
and his teaching.

“69 weeks” of Daniel’s
prophecy end

29 C.E.

c. 618-536 B.C.E.

c. 647-580 B.C.E.

607 B.C.E.

455 B.C.E.

Jeremiah
prophesies

First Temple
destroyed*

Commission to
rebuild Jerusalem

* For evidence supporting
this date, see the October 1
and November 1, 2011,
issues of The Watchtower

70 C.E.
Second Temple
destroyed

16

When Will God’s Promises
Come True?
“Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool
for your feet.”—PSALM 110:1.

PEOPLE have waited for the
Messiah for thousands of years.
To help us identify the time of
his arrival, Messianic prophecies
give us a picture of the conditions that would then exist in human society.
Would the Messiah’s arrival
mean immediate ful?llment of
all Messianic prophecies?
To ful?ll the prophecies, the
Messiah has to come twice—?rst
to cover sins, second to conquer
his enemies. Thus, David says:
“The utterance of Jehovah to my
Lord [the Messiah] is: ‘Sit at my
right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.’ ”
—Psalm 110:1.
What would happen when the
Messiah returned?
Rather than welcoming the
Messiah’s presence, the nations
in general would attempt to resist his Kingdom. “Why have the
nations been in tumult and the

national groups themselves kept
muttering an empty thing? The
kings of earth take their stand
and high o?cials themselves
have massed together as one
against Jehovah and against his
anointed one.”—Psalm 2:1, 2.
“There will certainly occur a
time of distress such as has not
been made to occur since there
came to be a nation until that
time. And during that time your
people will escape, ever y one
who is found written down in
the book.”—Daniel 12:1.
“When the wicked ones
sprout as the vegetation and all
the practicers of what is hurtful blossom for th, it is that
they may be annihilated forever.”
—Psalm 92:7 [92:8, TNK].
It is of interest that the socalled New Testament, written
by Jews, also foretells trying conditions just prior to the Messiah’s complete rule over all the
earth. Consider the following
descriptions:

Have You Seen
These Prophecies
Fulfilled?
“For nation will rise against
nation and kingdom against
kingdom, there will be earthquakes in one place after another, there will be food shortages.
These are a beginning of pangs
of distress.”—Mark 13:8.
“In the last days critical times
hard to deal with will be here.
For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, selfassuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, disloyal, having no
natural a?ection, not open to
any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, ?erce, without
love of goodness, betrayers,
headstrong, pu?ed up with
pride, lovers of pleasures rather
than lovers of God, having a
form of godly devotion but proving false to its power.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.

17

Will the Messiah Really
Remove All Evil?
“You have loved righteousness and you hate wickedness. That is
why God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of exultation
more than your partners.”—PSALM 45:7 [45:8, TNK].

IT IS the responsibility of any government
to uphold the law. As King of God’s government, the Messiah will do no less. “Just
a little while longer, and the wicked one will
be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and he will not be. But
the meek ones themselves will possess the
earth, and they will indeed ?nd their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”
—Psalm 37:10, 11.
How complete a change can we expect?
God will completely ful?ll his promise to
create “new heavens”—a righteous government ruling over “a new earth.” (Isaiah 65:
17) The blessings of the Messiah’s rule will
not be limited to the land of Israel, but
they will encompass “all the nations,” just
as Jehovah promised Abraham. (Isaiah 2:
2, 3; Genesis 22:18) God’s Kingdom under
the Messiah will provide a permanent and
universal answer to the challenge against
God’s name and purpose.
How will life be di?erent from today?
Mankind will see the long-awaited ful?llment of God’s promise through Isaiah:
“He will certainly render judgment among
the nations and set matters straight respecting many peoples. And they will have
to beat their swords into plowshares and

their spears into pruning shears. Nation
will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” The
prophecy continues: “They will not do
any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy
mountain; because the earth will certainly
be ?lled with the knowledge of Jehovah as
the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 2:4; 11:9.
How do we know that all of this will
really happen?
It is the unchangeable purpose of Almighty God, Jehovah, who is God “in the
heavens above and on the earth beneath.”
(Joshua 2:11) Jehovah himself tells us: “Remember the ?rst things of a long time ago,
that I am the Divine One and there is no
other God, nor anyone like me; the One
telling from the beginning the ?nale, and
from long ago the things that have not
been done; the One saying, ‘My own counsel will stand, and everything that is my
delight I shall do.’ ” (Isaiah 46:9, 10) Jehovah has declared that he will realize his
purpose through the Messiah. Who could
possibly prevent him from doing so?

18

What Blessings Will
the Messiah Bring?
“His name will be called . . . Prince of Peace.”
—ISAIAH 9:6 [9:5, TNK].

THE Messiah’s atoning sacri?ce will completely remove the burden of sin and guilt
from human hearts. Yet, his Kingdom will
accomplish much more.
How will God use the Kingdom under
the Messiah’s rule?
“In his days the righteous one will
sprout, and the abundance of peace until
the moon is no more. And he will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River to
the ends of the earth.”—Psalm 72:7, 8.
The blessings of the Messiah’s rule include endless life on earth. “The righteous

themselves will possess the earth, and they
will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:29)
“There Jehovah commanded the blessing
to be, even life to time inde?nite.” (Psalm
133:3) “Like the days of a tree will the days
of my people be; and the work of their own
hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”
—Isaiah 65:20-25.
Jehovah promised David “length of days
to time inde?nite, even forever.” (Psalm
21:4 [21:5, TNK]) To ful?ll that promise
will require a resurrection, as foretold elsewhere in the Scriptures. Consider a few examples: “If an able-bodied man dies can
he live again? . . . You will call, and I myself shall answer you. For the work of your
hands you will have a yearning.” (Job 14:
13-15) “He will actually swallow up death
forever, and the Sovereign Lord Jehovah
will certainly wipe the tears from all faces.”
(Isaiah 25:8) “You will rest, but you will
stand up for your lot at the end of the
days.”—Daniel 12:2, 13 [12:2, 12, TNK].
Jehovah has already demonstrated that
he has the desire and the ability to bring
dead ones back to life.—1 Kings 17:17-24;
2 Kings 4:32-37; 13:20, 21.

19

How Far Will the Messiah’s
Rule Extend?
“All the nations, for their part, will serve him.”
—PSALM 72:11.

THE Messiah’s rule will result in worldwide physical and, more important, spiritual blessings. “All the nations, for their
part, will serve him. For he will deliver the
poor one crying for help, also the a?icted one and whoever has no helper. He will
feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor
one, and the souls of the poor ones he will
save.”—Psalm 72:11-13.
“To the abundance of the princely rule
and to peace there will be no end, upon
the throne of David and upon his kingdom
in order to establish it ?rmly and to sustain it by means of justice and by means
of righteousness, from now on and to time
inde?nite.”—Isaiah 9:7 [9:6, TNK].

20

How Can We Be Part
of God’s Purpose?
“Let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah and to the house of the
God of Jacob; and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will
walk in his paths.”—MICAH 4:2.

ANYONE who wishes can be part of
God’s purpose and have a truly meaningful and happy life. But we must
be willing to make an e?ort. First, we
must learn more about God and his
purposes.
How can we get to know God and
his purposes better?
Solomon wrote: “If you will receive
my sayings and treasure up my own
commandments with yourself, so as
to pay attention to wisdom with your
ear, that you may incline your heart to
discernment; if, moreover, you call out
for understanding itself and you give
forth your voice for discernment itself, if you keep seeking for it as for silver, and as for hid treasures you keep
searching for it, in that case you will
understand the fear of Jehovah, and
you will ?nd the very knowledge of
God.”—Proverbs 2:1-5.
Notice the word “if.” It is used three
times. Clearly, gaining “the very knowledge of God” calls for determination to learn his will and to carry it
out. Taking in this knowledge is worth
whatever time and e?ort are required.

(Proverbs 23:23) Jehovah’s Witnesses would be happy to show you how
you can gain the future that Adam and
Eve forfeited. It will mean sharing in Jehovah’s beautiful purpose—to live life
as he originally intended, to his praise
and to your eternal happiness!

Learning God’s will is worth whatever time
and e?ort are required

Questions this brochure addresses:
? What do we need to be happy?
? How can God’s guidance bring us
happiness now?
? What hope do we have for future
happiness?
? What was God’s original purpose for man?
? When will God’s promises come true?
? What blessings will the Messiah bring?

hl-E
160611

s

Visit www.jw.org,
or scan code

