IMITATE
THEIR FAITH
Large-Print Edition

ialp-E
160901

s

IMITATE THEIR
FAITH
Large-Print Edition

This book is the property of

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from
the modern-language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures
—With References.
Imitate Their Faith—Large Print
August 2016 Printing
English (ialp-E)
5 2015
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY
OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of
New York, Inc., Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

To Our Dear Brothers and Sisters:
In its very first issue, January 1, 2008, the public edition of The Watchtower introduced us to a fascinating
new series of articles entitled “Imitate Their Faith.”
Since then, a new article in that series has been published every three months, much to our delight!
What has been the response to the series? After she
finished reading the article on Martha, one reader
wrote: “I laughed when I read it because I’m just like
her—always desiring to be a good hostess and to be
busy but sometimes forgetful of the need to pause
and enjoy association with the friends.” A teenager
drew this interesting conclusion from the story of
Esther: “I could relate to the fact that we can be
obsessed with clothes and the latest fashions. We
should be well-groomed; yet, we don’t want to go
overboard.” She added: “Jehovah cares about who
we are inside.” And an article featuring the apostle

Peter elicited this enthusiastic reaction from a Christian sister: “You pulled me lock, stock, and barrel
into the account. It came to life! I used my senses to
feel what the passages only alluded to.”
These readers—and countless others who have written to express their appreciation for the series—confirm what the apostle Paul wrote long ago: “All the
things that were written aforetime were written for
our instruction.” (Rom. 15:4) Yes, Jehovah had these
narratives included in the Bible in order to teach us
valuable lessons. All of us, no matter how many
years we have known the truth, can learn from them.
We warmly encourage you to read this book as soon
as possible. Include it as part of your Family Worship program—the children will love it! When the
congregation studies the material during the Congregation Bible Study, do not miss a single week! Take

your time; read it slowly. Use your imagination; get
your senses involved. Try to feel what those Bible
characters felt, to see what they saw. Compare how
they reacted in a given situation with the way you
would likely have responded.
It gives us great pleasure to share this publication
with you. May it prove to be a blessing to you and
your family. With much love and every good wish,

Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

IMITATE THEIR
FAITH
Large-Print Edition

Introduction
“Be imitators of those who through faith and patience
inherit the promises.”—HEBREWS 6:12.

“HE SPEAKS about Bible characters as if they were
old friends of his.” After listening to a discourse
by an elderly traveling overseer, a Christian woman made that observation. And rightly so, for the
brother had spent decades studying God’s Word and
teaching from it—so much so that the Bible’s men
and women of faith did, indeed, seem like old friends
whom he had known all his life.
2

Would not many of those Bible characters make

wonderful friends? Are they that real to you? Imagine what it would be like to walk and talk with them,
to spend time getting to know such men and women
as Noah, Abraham, Ruth, Elijah, and Esther. Think
of the in?uence they might have on your life—the
1, 2. How did one traveling overseer evidently view faithful Bible characters, and why would such ones make wonderful friends?
6

precious words of advice and encouragement they
might o?er!—Read Proverbs 13:20.
Of course, at the time of the “resurrection of . . .
the righteous,” that kind of rewarding relationship
will be fully possible. (Acts 24:15) However, even
right now we can bene?t from learning about the Bible’s men and women of faith. How? The apostle
Paul o?ers this practical answer: “Be imitators of
those who through faith and patience inherit the
promises.” (Heb. 6:12) As we embark on a study of
the subject of men and women of faith, let us consider a few questions that Paul’s words bring to
mind: Just what is faith, and why do we need it? How
can we imitate faithful people of old?
3

Faith—What It Is and Why We Need It
4 Faith is an appealing quality, one that all the men
and women we will study about in this publication
valued highly. Many people today tend to undervalue faith, assuming that it means believing without any real proof or evidence. However, they are
3. (a) How can we bene?t from learning about the Bible’s men and
women of faith? (b) What questions will we consider?
4. What do people tend to assume about faith, and why are they mistaken?
7

mistaken. Faith is not gullibility; it is not a mere feeling; it is more than belief. Gullibility is dangerous.
A mere feeling may come and go, and even belief is
insu?cient when it comes to God, for “the demons
believe and shudder.”—Jas. 2:19.
5

True faith towers over such things. Recall how

the Bible de?nes it. (Read Hebrews 11:1.) Paul said
that faith focuses on two kinds of things that we
cannot see. One, it focuses on present realities that
are “not beheld.” Our physical eyes cannot see the
realities in the spirit realm—such as Jehovah God,
his Son, or the Kingdom that now rules in heaven.
Two, faith focuses on “things hoped for”—events
that have not yet happened. We cannot now see the
new world that God’s Kingdom will soon bring
about. Does that mean, then, that our faith in such
realities and the things we have hoped for is groundless?
6

Far from it! Paul explained that true faith is sol-

idly grounded. When he called faith “the assured expectation,” he used an expression that may also be
5, 6. (a) Our faith focuses on what two kinds of unseen things?
(b) How solidly grounded should our faith be? Illustrate.
8

rendered “title deed.” Imagine that someone decided
to give you a house. He might hand you the deed to
the place and say, “Here is your new home.” Of
course, he does not mean that you will live on that
piece of paper; he means that the document is so legally binding that for all practical purposes, it is the
house itself. Similarly, the evidence for our faith is
so convincing, so strong, that it may be equated to
our faith itself.
7

Thus, true faith involves well-founded con?dence

and unshakable conviction that is clearly focused on
Jehovah God. Faith causes us to see him as our loving Father and to trust that all his promises are sure
to come true. But genuine faith involves more. Like
a living thing, it must be nourished to survive. It
must be expressed in actions, or it will die.—Jas.
2:26.
8

Why is faith so important? Paul provided a com-

pelling answer. (Read Hebrews 11:6.) We can neither
approach Jehovah nor please him unless we have
faith. So faith is essential if we are to ful?ll the
7. What does true faith involve?
8. Why is faith so important?
9

highest, noblest purpose of any intelligent creature:
to draw close to and glorify our heavenly Father,
Jehovah.
9

Jehovah knows how much we need faith, so he

provides us with examples to teach us how to build
and show faith. He blesses the Christian congregation with examples of faithful men who take the
lead. His Word says: “Imitate their faith.” (Heb. 13:7)
And he has given us more. Paul wrote about a “great
. . . cloud of witnesses,” men and women of ancient
times who left sterling examples of faith. (Heb. 12:1)
Paul’s list of faithful ones, recorded in Hebrews
chapter 11, is by no means complete. The Bible’s pages are rich with true stories about men and women,
young and old, from all walks of life, who lived lives
of faith and who have much to teach us in these
faithless times.
10

How Can We Imitate the Faith of Others?
You cannot imitate a person unless you ?rst ob-

serve him closely. As you read through this publica9. How has Jehovah shown that he is aware of our need for faith?
10. How might our personal study help us to imitate the faithful men
and women in the Bible record?
10

tion, you will notice that much research has been
done to help you observe these men and women of
faith. Why not follow suit and do additional research
of your own? In your personal study, dig into the Bible with the research tools you have at hand. As you
meditate on what you study, try to picture the setting and background of Bible accounts. Try to see
the sights, hear the sounds, smell the aromas, so to
speak. More important, try to discern the feelings of
the people involved. As you empathize with those
faithful men and women, they will become more real
to you, more familiar—some may even come to seem
like dear old friends.
11

When you truly come to know them, you will

want to imitate them. For instance, imagine contemplating a new assignment. Through Jehovah’s organization, you are invited to expand your ministry in
some way. Perhaps you are asked to move to a territory where there is an urgent need for more preachers, or maybe you are invited to try some form of
11, 12. (a) How might you come to feel closer to Abram and Sarai?
(b) How might you bene?t from the example of Hannah, Elijah, or
Samuel?
11

preaching that you ?nd unfamiliar or uncomfortable.
As you contemplate the assignment and pray about
it, would it help to meditate on the example of
Abram? He and Sarai were willing to forgo the comforts of Ur and were richly blessed as a result. As
you follow in their footsteps, you will surely feel that
you now know them better than ever before.
12 Similarly, what if someone close to you were to
treat you spitefully and you felt discouraged—even
felt tempted to stay home from the meetings? If you
contemplated Hannah’s example and the way she
rose above Peninnah’s spitefulness, it would help
you to make the right decision—and it might make
Hannah seem more like a dear friend too. Likewise,
if you are discouraged by feelings of worthlessness,
you might feel closer to Elijah as you study his
plight and the way Jehovah comforted him. And
youths who are bombarded by pressures from immoral schoolmates may feel closer to Samuel after
studying how he handled the corrupt in?uence of
Eli’s sons at the tabernacle.
13 Does imitating the faith of such Bible characters
13. Would imitating the faith of a Bible character somehow make you
less of an individual? Explain.
12

somehow make you a mere imitation or less of an individual? Far from it! Remember, Jehovah’s Word encourages us to imitate people of faith. (1 Cor. 4:16;
11:1; 2 Thess. 3:7, 9) What is more, some of the people whom we will study herein were themselves imitators of faithful ones who went before them. For
instance, we note in Chapter 17 of this book that in
her speech, Mary evidently drew on Hannah’s words,
clearly seeing her as an example. Did that make
Mary’s faith any less strong? Hardly! Rather, Hannah’s example helped Mary to build faith so that she
could make her own unique name with Jehovah God.
14

This book has been designed to help you

strengthen your faith. The chapters that follow are
a compilation of articles from the “Imitate Their
Faith” series published in The Watchtower between
2008 and 2013. However, some new material has
been added. Questions are provided for discussion
and application. Many colorful, detailed illustrations
have been created for this volume, and existing ones
have been enlarged and enhanced. Other helpful
14, 15. What are some features of this publication, and how can we
make good use of it?
13

features, such as a time line and maps, have been included. Imitate Their Faith is a tool designed for personal, family, and congregation study. Many families
might also enjoy simply reading the stories aloud together.
15

May this book help you to imitate the faith of

Jehovah’s loyal servants from the past. And may it
help you to grow in faith as you draw closer to your
heavenly Father, Jehovah!

14

CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

6

Introduction
1

“He, Although He Died,
Yet Speaks”

ABEL

18

2

He “Walked With
the True God”

NOAH

31

3

“The Father of All Those
Having Faith”

ABRAM

44

4

“Where You Go
I Shall Go”

RUTH

59

5

“An Excellent
Woman”

RUTH

75

6

She Opened Her Heart
to God in Prayer

HANNAH

90

7

He “Continued Growing
Up With Jehovah”

SAMUEL

104

8

He Endured Despite
Disappointments

SAMUEL

118

9

She Acted With
Discretion

ABIGAIL

133

10

He Stood Up
for Pure Worship

ELIJAH

147

11

He Watched,
and He Waited

ELIJAH

161

12

He Took Comfort
in His God

ELIJAH

172

13

He Learned
From His Mistakes

JONAH

187

14

He Learned
a Lesson in Mercy

JONAH

201

15

She Stood Up
for God’s People

ESTHER

215

16

She Acted Wisely,
Bravely, and Selflessly

ESTHER

231

17

“Look! Jehovah’s
Slave Girl!”

MARY

248

18

She Drew “Conclusions
in Her Heart”

MARY

261

19

He Protected, He Provided,
He Persevered

JOSEPH

274

20

“I Have Believed”

MARTHA

290

21

He Fought Against
Fear and Doubt

PETER

304

22

He Was Loyal
in the Face of Tests

PETER

317

23

He Learned Forgiveness
From the Master

PETER

330

Conclusion

345

CHAPTER ONE

“He, Although He Died, Yet Speaks”
ABEL looked at his ?ock of sheep grazing peacefully on the hillside. Then, perhaps he looked far beyond his sheep to a spot in the distance where he
could just make out a faint glow. He knew that right
there a ?aming blade was turning, ever turning,
blocking the way into the garden of Eden. His parents once lived there, but neither they nor their children could enter now. Imagine the late afternoon
breeze ru?ing Abel’s hair as he turned his gaze upward and thought about his Creator. Would the
breach between man and God ever be healed? Abel
wanted nothing more than that.
Abel speaks to you today. Can you hear him? You
might say that such a thing is impossible. After all,
this second son of Adam died a long time ago. His
remains are long lost, mingled with the dust of nearly 60 centuries. Regarding the dead, the Bible teach2

1. What prevented the family of Adam and Eve from entering the garden of Eden, and what did Abel want more than anything else?
2-4. In what sense does Abel speak to us today?
18

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

es us: “They are conscious of nothing at all.” (Eccl.
9:5, 10) Further, Abel never uttered a single word
that is recorded in the Bible. So how can he speak
to us?
3

The apostle Paul was inspired to say this about

Abel: “Through it he, although he died, yet speaks.”
(Read Hebrews 11:4.) Through what does Abel speak?
Through faith. Abel was the ?rst human ever to develop that sterling quality. So powerfully did he
demonstrate faith that his example is alive, a vibrant
standard that we can apply today. If we learn from
his faith and seek to imitate it, then the record of
Abel is speaking to us in a very real and e?ective
way.
4

What, though, can we learn of Abel and his faith

when so little is said about him in the Bible? Let us
see.

5

Growing Up in the T ime
of “the Founding of the World”
Abel was born near the dawn of human history.

Jesus later associated Abel with “the founding of the
5. What is the meaning of Jesus’ statement associating Abel with “the
founding of the world”? (See also footnote.)
“HE, ALTHOUGH HE DIED, YET SPEAKS”

19

world.” (Read Luke 11:50, 51.) Jesus evidently meant
the world of people who might be redeemed from
sin. While Abel was the fourth human to exist, it
seems that he was the ?rst one whom God saw as redeemable.1 Clearly, Abel did not grow up among the
best of in?uences.
6

Though the world was young, a pall of sadness

hung over the human family. Abel’s parents, Adam
and Eve, were likely beautiful, dynamic people. But
they had fallen far in life, and they knew it. They
were once perfect, with the prospect of eternal life
before them. Then they rebelled against Jehovah
God and were banished from their Paradise home
in the garden of Eden. By putting their own desires ahead of all else—even the needs of their o?spring—they lost perfection and eternal life.—Gen.
2:15–3:24.
1 The expression “the founding of the world” involves the idea of
casting down seed, suggesting procreation, so it has to do with the
earliest human o?spring. Why, though, did Jesus connect Abel with
“the founding of the world” and not Cain, who was the ?rst such
o?spring? Cain’s decisions and actions amounted to a willful rebellion against Jehovah God. Like his parents, Cain does not appear
to be in line for resurrection and redemption.

6. What kind of parents did Abel have?
20

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

7

Exiled to life outside the garden, Adam and Eve

found their existence hard. Yet, when their ?rst child
was born, they named him Cain, or “Something Produced,” and Eve proclaimed: “I have produced a man
with the aid of Jehovah.” Her words suggest that she
may have had in mind the promise Jehovah made in
the garden, foretelling that a certain woman would
produce a “seed,” or o?spring, who would one day
destroy the wicked one who had led Adam and Eve
astray. (Gen. 3:15; 4:1) Did Eve imagine that she was
the woman in the prophecy and that Cain was the
promised “seed”?
8

If so, she was sadly mistaken. What is more, if

she and Adam fed Cain such ideas as he grew up,
they surely did his imperfect human pride no good.
In time, Eve bore a second son, but we ?nd no such
high-?own statements about him. They named him
Abel, which may mean “Exhalation,” or “Vanity.”
(Gen. 4:2) Did that choice of a name re?ect lower expectations, as if they put less hope in Abel than in
Cain? We can only guess.
7, 8. What did Eve say when Cain was born, and what may she have
had in mind?
“HE, ALTHOUGH HE DIED, YET SPEAKS”

21

Parents today can learn much from those ?rst
parents. By your words and actions, will you feed
your children’s pride, ambition, and sel?sh tendencies? Or will you teach them to love Jehovah God
and to seek friendship with him? Sadly, the ?rst parents failed in their responsibility. Yet, there was
hope for their o?spring.
9

Abel Developed Faith—How?
10 As the two boys grew up, Adam likely trained
them in work that was necessary to provide for the
family. Cain took up farming; Abel took up shepherding.
11 However, Abel did something far more important. Over the years, he developed faith—that beautiful quality of which Paul later wrote. Think of it!
Abel had no human example to whom he could look.
How, then, did he develop faith in Jehovah God?
Consider three solid bases on which his faith likely
rested.
12 Jehovah’s creation. True, Jehovah had placed a
9. What can parents today learn from our ?rst parents?
10, 11. Cain and Abel took up what kinds of work, and what quality
did Abel develop?
12, 13. How might observing Jehovah’s creation have helped Abel to
grow in faith?
22

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

curse on the ground, causing it to produce thorns
and thistles that impeded agriculture. Still, the earth
generously produced the food that kept Abel’s family alive. And there was no curse on the animals, including birds and ?sh; nor on the mountains, lakes,
rivers, and seas; nor on the skies, clouds, sun, moon,
and stars. Everywhere Abel looked, he saw evidence
of the profound love, wisdom, and goodness of Jehovah God, the one who created all things. (Read Romans 1:20.) No doubt, meditating appreciatively on
such things strengthened Abel’s faith.
13

Abel surely took time to ponder spiritual mat-

ters. Picture him tending his ?ock. A shepherd’s life
required a great deal of walking. He led the gentle
creatures over hills, through valleys, across rivers
—ever seeking the greenest grass, the best watering
holes, the most sheltered resting-places. Of all of
God’s creatures, sheep seemed the most helpless, as
if they were designed to need man to guide and protect them. Did Abel see that he too needed guidance, protection, and care from Someone far wiser
and more powerful than any human? No doubt he
“HE, ALTHOUGH HE DIED, YET SPEAKS”

23

expressed many such thoughts in prayer, and his
faith continued to grow as a result.
14

Jehovah’s promises. Adam and Eve must have re-

lated to their sons the events in the garden of Eden
that led to their expulsion. Thus, Abel had much
food for meditation.
15

Jehovah said that the ground would be cursed.

Abel could clearly see the thorns and thistles that
ful?lled those words. Jehovah also foretold that Eve
would su?er pain in pregnancy and childbirth. As
Abel’s siblings were born, he no doubt learned that
those words came true as well. Jehovah foresaw that
Eve would feel an unbalanced need for her husband’s
love and attention and that Adam would, in turn,
dominate her. Abel watched that sad reality playing
out before his eyes. In every case, Abel saw that Jehovah’s word is completely reliable. Thus, Abel had
solid reasons for putting faith in God’s promise
about a “seed,” or o?spring, who would one day
right the wrongs that had begun in Eden.—Gen. 3:
15-19.
14, 15. Jehovah’s promises gave Abel what food for meditation?
24

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

Jehovah’s servants. Abel did not ?nd any good examples in the human family, but humans were not
the only intelligent creatures on the earth at that
time. When Adam and Eve were expelled from the
garden, Jehovah made sure that neither they nor
their o?spring would gain access to that earthly Paradise. To guard the entrance, Jehovah posted cherubs—very high-ranking angels—along with the ?aming blade of a sword that turned continually.—Read
Genesis 3:24.
16

Imagine what it was like for Abel to see those
cherubs when he was a boy. In their materialized form, their appearance surely bespoke immense
power. And that “sword,” ever a?ame, ever turning,
inspired awe as well. As Abel grew up, did he ever
?nd that those cherubs got bored and left their post?
No. Day and night, year after year, decade after decade, those intelligent, powerful creatures stayed
right in that spot. Abel thus learned that Jehovah
God had righteous, steadfast servants. In those cherubs, Abel could see a kind of loyalty and obedience
to Jehovah that he could not ?nd in his own family.
17

16, 17. What might Abel have learned from Jehovah’s cherubs?
“HE, ALTHOUGH HE DIED, YET SPEAKS”

25

That angelic example no doubt strengthened his
faith.
18

Meditating on all that Jehovah revealed about

himself through creation, divine promises, and the
examples of His angelic servants, Abel found that his
faith grew ever stronger. His example speaks to us,
does it not? Young people in particular may ?nd it
reassuring to know that they can develop genuine
faith in Jehovah God, no matter what their family members do. With the wonders of creation all
around us and the entire Bible at our disposal, as
well as many human examples of faith, we have ample basis for building faith today.
19

Abel’s S acri?ce—Why It Excelled
As Abel’s faith in Jehovah grew, he wanted to

?nd a way to express that faith in action. Yet, what
could a mere man give to the Creator of the universe? Clearly, God did not need any gift or help
from humans. In time, Abel came to grasp a profound truth: If—with the right motive—he simply
18. What ample basis do we have for building faith today?
19. In time, what profound truth did Abel come to grasp?
26

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

o?ered to Jehovah the best of what he had, his loving Father would be pleased.
Abel prepared to o?er up some sheep from his
?ock. He selected the best, the ?rstlings, and what
seemed the choicest pieces. Meanwhile, Cain too
sought God’s blessing and favor, preparing an o?ering from his crops. But his motives were not like
those of Abel. The di?erence became apparent when
the brothers presented their o?erings.
20

Both sons of Adam may have used altars and ?re
for their o?erings, perhaps within sight of the cherubs, who were the only living representatives of Jehovah on earth at that time. Jehovah responded! We
read: “Jehovah was looking with favor upon Abel
and his o?ering.” (Gen. 4:4) How God made his favor evident, the Bible does not say.
21

Why did God favor Abel? Was it the o?ering itself? Abel did o?er a living, breathing creature, shedding its precious lifeblood. Did Abel realize how
valuable such a sacri?ce would be? Many centuries after Abel’s time, God used the sacri?ce of an
22

20, 21. Cain and Abel each made what o?ering to Jehovah, and how
did he respond?
22, 23. What accounts for the way Jehovah favored Abel’s o?ering?
“HE, ALTHOUGH HE DIED, YET SPEAKS”

27

unblemished lamb to picture the sacri?ce of His own
perfect Son, “the Lamb of God,” whose innocent
blood would be shed. (John 1:29; Ex. 12:5-7) However, much of that surely lay well beyond Abel’s
knowledge or understanding.
23

What we know for certain is this: Abel o?ered

up the very best of what he had. Jehovah looked
with favor not only on the o?ering but on the man
himself. Motivated by love for Jehovah and by genuine faith in him, Abel acted.
24

It was di?erent with Cain. Jehovah “did not look

with any favor upon Cain and upon his o?ering.”
(Gen. 4:5) It was not that Cain’s o?ering was faulty
in itself; God’s Law later allowed the o?ering of the
produce of the ground. (Lev. 6:14, 15) But the Bible
says of Cain that “his own works were wicked.” (Read
1 John 3:12.) Like so many to this day, Cain evidently thought that the mere outward show of devotion
to God was enough. His lack of real faith in or love
for Jehovah quickly became apparent through his actions.
24. (a) Why do we say that Cain’s o?ering was not faulty in itself?
(b) In what way was Cain like many to this day?
28

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

25

When Cain saw that he had not won Jehovah’s

favor, did he seek to learn from Abel’s example? No.
He seethed with hatred for his brother. Jehovah saw
what was happening in Cain’s heart and patiently
tried to reason with him. He warned Cain that his
course was leading toward serious sin, and He offered the hope of “an exaltation” if Cain would only
change his ways.—Gen. 4:6, 7.
26

Cain ignored God’s warning. He invited his

trusting younger brother to walk with him in the
?eld. There Cain assaulted Abel and murdered him.
(Gen. 4:8) In a sense, Abel thus became the ?rst victim of religious persecution, the ?rst martyr. He was
dead, but his story was far from ?nished.
27

Figuratively, Abel’s blood cried out to Jehovah

God for vengeance, or justice. And God saw justice
done, punishing wicked Cain for his crime. (Gen. 4:
9-12) More important, the record of Abel’s faith
speaks to us today. His life span—perhaps about a
century long—was short for humans of that era, but
25, 26. Jehovah gave Cain what warning, yet what did Cain do?
27. (a) Why can we be con?dent that Abel is in line for a resurrection?
(b) How can we be sure to meet Abel one day?
“HE, ALTHOUGH HE DIED, YET SPEAKS”

29

Abel made his years on this earth count. He died
knowing that he had the love and approval of his
heavenly Father, Jehovah. (Heb. 11:4) We can be
con?dent, then, that he is safe in Jehovah’s limitless
memory, awaiting a resurrection to life in an earthly paradise. (John 5:28, 29) Will you meet him there?
You can if you are determined to listen as Abel
speaks and to imitate his outstanding faith.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How does Abel speak to us today?
? What can parents learn from the mistakes of
Abel’s parents?
? How might Jehovah’s creation, his promises,
and his cherubs have helped Abel to build
faith?
? In what ways do you intend to imitate Abel’s
faith?

30

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABEL

CHAPTER TWO

He “Walked With the True God”
NOAH straightened his back and stretched his aching muscles. Picture him seated on a broad wooden
beam, taking a moment’s rest from his work as he
looked out over the immense structure of the ark.
The pungent smell of hot tar was in the air; the
sounds of woodworking tools reverberated. From
where he sat, Noah could see his sons hard at work
on various parts of the great network of timbers. His
sons, their wives, and his own dear wife had all been
laboring with him on this project for decades now.
They had come a long way, but they had a long way
to go!
2

The people of the region thought of them all as

fools. The more the ark took shape, the more the
people laughed at the very thought of a deluge that
would cover the whole earth. The disaster that Noah
kept warning them about seemed so far-fetched, so
1, 2. Noah and his family were involved in what project, and what were
some of the challenges they faced?
HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

31

preposterous! They could hardly believe that a man
would waste his life—and the lives of his family—in
such a foolish endeavor. However, Noah’s God, Jehovah, saw the man in a very di?erent light.
3

God’s Word says: “Noah walked with the true

God.” (Read Genesis 6:9.) What did that mean? Not
that God walked on earth, nor that Noah somehow
went to heaven. Rather, Noah obeyed his God so
closely and loved him so dearly that it was as if he
and Jehovah walked together as friends. Thousands
of years later, the Bible said of Noah: “Through [his]
faith he condemned the world.” (Heb. 11:7) How was
that so? What can we today learn from his faith?
4

A Faultless Man in a Twisted World
Noah grew up in a world that was rapidly going

from bad to worse. It had been bad in the days of
his great-grandfather Enoch, another righteous man
who walked with God. Enoch had foretold that a day
of judgment was coming upon the ungodly people
of the world. Now, in Noah’s day, ungodliness was
3. In what sense did Noah walk with God?
4, 5. In Noah’s day, how had the world gone from bad to worse?
32

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  NOAH

far worse. In fact, from Jehovah’s viewpoint, the
earth was ruined, for it was ?lled with violence.
(Gen. 5:22; 6:11; Jude 14, 15) What had happened to
make things so much worse?
5

A terrible tragedy had unfolded among God’s

spirit sons, the angels. One of them had already rebelled against Jehovah, becoming Satan the Devil by
slandering God and luring Adam and Eve into sin.
In Noah’s day, other angels began to revolt against
Jehovah’s just rule. Forsaking their God-given station in heaven, they came to earth, assumed human
form, and took beautiful women as their wives.
Those proud, sel?sh rebel angels were a poisonous
in?uence among humans.—Gen. 6:1, 2; Jude 6, 7.
6

Further, the unnatural unions between materi-

alized angels and human women produced hybrid
sons of extraordinary size and strength. The Bible
calls them Nephilim, which literally means “Fellers”
—those who cause others to fall. Vicious bullies,
the Nephilim intensi?ed the world’s brutal, ungodly
spirit. Little wonder that in the view of the Creator,
6. What e?ect did the Nephilim have on the world’s spirit, and what
did Jehovah determine to do?
HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

33

“the badness of man was abundant in the earth and
every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was
only bad all the time.” Jehovah determined that he
would wipe out that wicked society in 120 years.
—Read Genesis 6:3-5.
7

Imagine trying to raise a family in such a world!

Yet, Noah did so. He found a good wife. After Noah
turned 500 years of age, his wife bore him three sons
—Shem, Ham, and Japheth.1 Together, the parents
had to protect their boys from the vile in?uences
surrounding them. Little boys tend to be ?lled with
awe and admiration for “mighty ones” and “men of
fame”—and the Nephilim were just that. Noah and
his wife could hardly shield the children from every
report about the exploits of those giants, but they
could teach the appealing truth about Jehovah God,
the one who hates all wickedness. They had to help
their boys see that Jehovah felt hurt by the violence
and rebellion in the world.—Gen. 6:6.
1 People in those early days lived far longer than we do today.
Their longevity evidently had to do with their being closer to the
vitality and perfection that Adam and Eve once had but lost.

7. Noah and his wife faced what challenge in protecting their sons from
the vile in?uences of the day?
34

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  NOAH

Parents today may well sympathize with Noah
and his wife. Our world is likewise poisoned by violence and rebelliousness. Cities are often dominated
by gangs of wayward youths. Even entertainment directed at young children may be saturated with violent themes. Wise parents do all they can to counter
such in?uences by teaching their children about the
God of peace, Jehovah, who will one day bring all violence to an end. (Ps. 11:5; 37:10, 11) Success is possible! Noah and his wife succeeded. Their boys grew
up to be good men, and they married wives who
were likewise willing to put the true God, Jehovah,
?rst in their lives.
8

“Make for Yourself an Ark”
9 One day, Noah’s life changed forever. Jehovah
spoke to this beloved servant and told him of His
purpose to bring the world of that time to an end.
God commanded Noah: “Make for yourself an ark
out of wood of a resinous tree.”—Gen. 6:14.
10

This ark was not a ship, as some assume. It had

8. How can wise parents today imitate the example of Noah and his
wife?
9, 10. (a) What command from Jehovah changed Noah’s life? (b) What
did Jehovah reveal to Noah about the ark’s design and purpose?
HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

35

neither bow nor stern, keel nor rudder—no curves.
It was basically a great chest, or box. Jehovah gave
Noah the precise dimensions of the ark, some details
regarding its design, and directions to coat it inside
and out with tar. And he told Noah why: “Here I am
bringing the deluge of waters upon the earth . . .
Everything that is in the earth will expire.” However,
Jehovah made this covenant, or formal agreement,
with Noah: “You must go into the ark, you and your
sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you.”
Noah was also to bring representatives of all kinds
of animals. Only those aboard the ark could survive
the coming Deluge!—Gen. 6:17-20.
11 Noah faced a gigantic task. This ark was to be
enormous—some 437 feet long, 73 feet wide, and
44 feet tall. It was far larger than the largest seagoing wooden ships built even in modern times. Did
Noah back o? from this assignment, complain about
its challenges, or alter the details to make it easier
on himself? The Bible answers: “Noah proceeded to
do according to all that God had commanded him.
He did just so.”—Gen. 6:22.
11, 12. Noah faced what gigantic task, and how did he respond to the
challenge?
36

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  NOAH

12

The work took decades, perhaps 40 to 50 years.

There were trees to fell, logs to haul, and beams to
hew, shape, and join. The ark was to have three stories, or decks, a number of compartments, and a
door in the side. Evidently, there were windows
along the top, as well as a roof that likely peaked in
the middle with a slight pitch so that water would
run o?.—Gen. 6:14-16.
13

As the years passed and the ark took shape,

Noah must have been so glad to have the support of
his family! There was another aspect to the work
that might have been even more challenging than
ark-building. The Bible tells us that Noah was “a
preacher of righteousness.” (Read 2 Peter 2:5.) So he
courageously took the lead in trying to warn the
people of that wicked, godless society about the destruction that was heading their way. How did they
respond? Jesus Christ later recalled that time, saying
that those people “took no note.” He said that they
were so caught up in the a?airs of daily life—eating,
drinking, and marrying—that they paid no heed to
13. What aspect of Noah’s work may have been more challenging than
ark-building, and how did people respond to it?
HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

37

Noah. (Matt. 24:37-39) No doubt many ridiculed him
and his family; some may have threatened him and
violently opposed him. They may even have tried to
sabotage the construction project.
14

Yet, Noah and his family never quit. Even

though they lived in a world that was geared toward
making their primary pursuit in life seem trivial,
misguided, or foolish, they still kept at it faithfully.
Christian families today can thus learn a great deal
from the faith of Noah and his family. After all, we
live in what the Bible calls “the last days” of this
world system of things. (2 Tim. 3:1) Jesus said that
our era would be just like the era in which Noah
built the ark. If the world reacts to the message
about God’s Kingdom with apathy, ridicule, or even
persecution, Christians do well to remember Noah.
They are not the ?rst to face such challenges.
15

“Go . . . Into the Ark”
Decades passed, and the ark gradually assumed

its ?nal shape. As Noah neared his 600th year, he
14. What can Christian families today learn from Noah and his family?
15. Noah dealt with what losses as he neared his 600th year?
38

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  NOAH

dealt with losses. His father, Lamech, died.1 Five
years later, Lamech’s father, Noah’s grandfather Methuselah, died at the age of 969—ending the longest
human life in the Bible record. (Gen. 5:27) Both Methuselah and Lamech had been contemporaries of
the ?rst man, Adam.
16

In his 600th year, the patriarch Noah received a

new message from Jehovah God: “Go, you and all
your household, into the ark.” At the same time,
God told Noah to take all the kinds of animals into
the ark—by sevens in the case of the clean ones, ?t
for sacri?cial use, and the rest by twos.—Gen. 7:1-3.
17

It must have been an unforgettable sight. From

the horizon they streamed in by the thousands
—walking, ?ying, crawling, waddling, lumbering—all
in an astonishing variety of sizes, shapes, and dispositions. We need not imagine poor Noah trying to
1 Lamech had given his son the name Noah—probably meaning
“Rest” or “Consolation”—and had prophesied that Noah would ful?ll the signi?cance of his name by leading mankind to a rest from
toiling on cursed ground. (Gen. 5:28, 29) Lamech did not live to see
his prophecy ful?lled. Noah’s mother, brothers, and sisters may
have perished in the Flood.

16, 17. (a) Noah received what new message in his 600th year? (b) Describe the unforgettable sight that Noah and his family witnessed.
HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

39

corral, wrangle, or somehow cajole all those wild animals into entering the con?ned space of the ark.
The account says that “they went in . . . to Noah inside the ark.”—Gen. 7:9.
18

Some skeptics might ask: ‘How could such a

thing happen? And how could all those animals
coexist peacefully in a con?ned space?’ Consider: Is
it really beyond the power of the Creator of the entire universe to control his animal creations, even
render them tame and docile if needed? Remember,
Jehovah is the God who created the animals. Much
later, he also parted the Red Sea and made the sun
stand still. Could he not carry out every event described in Noah’s account? Of course he could, and
he did!
19

Granted, God could have chosen to save his an-

imal creations in some other way. However, he wisely chose a way that reminds us of the trust that he
originally placed in humans to take care of all the
living things on this earth. (Gen. 1:28) Many parents
18, 19. (a) How might we reason on the questions that skeptics raise
regarding the events in Noah’s account? (b) How do we see Jehovah’s
wisdom in the way that he chose to save his animal creations?
40

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  NOAH

today thus use Noah’s story to teach their children
that Jehovah values the animals and the people he
has created.
20

Jehovah told Noah that the Deluge would come

in a week. It must have been a hectic time for the
family. Imagine the work of getting all the animals
as well as foodstu?s for the animals and for the family placed in an orderly fashion and hauling the family’s belongings aboard. Noah’s wife and the wives
of Shem, Ham, and Japheth may have been especially concerned about making a livable home in that
ark.
What of the community? They still “took no
note”—even in the face of all the evidence that Je21

hovah was blessing Noah and his endeavors. They
could not help but notice the animals streaming into
the ark. But we should not be surprised at their
apathy. People today likewise take no note of the
overwhelming evidence that we are now living in the
20. How might Noah and his family have been occupied during the ?nal
week before the Deluge?
21, 22. (a) Why should we not be surprised at the apathy of the community in Noah’s day? (b) When did the ridicule that Noah and his
family received from their neighbors come to an end?
HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

41

?nal days of this world system of things. And as the
apostle Peter foretold, ridiculers have come with
their ridicule, mocking those who heed God’s warning. (Read 2 Peter 3:3-6.) Likewise, people surely ridiculed Noah and his family.
22

When did the ridicule end? The account tells us

that once Noah had brought his family and the animals inside the ark, “Jehovah shut the door behind
him.” If any ridiculers were nearby, that divine action no doubt silenced them. If not, the rain did—for
down it came! And it kept coming, and coming, and
coming—?ooding the whole world, just as Jehovah
had said.—Gen. 7:16-21.
23

Did Jehovah take delight in the death of those

wicked people? No! (Ezek. 33:11) On the contrary,
he had given them ample opportunity to change
their ways and do what was right. Could they have
done so? Noah’s life course answered that question.
By walking with Jehovah, obeying his God in all
things, Noah showed that survival was possible. In
23. (a) How do we know that Jehovah took no delight in the death of
the wicked in Noah’s day? (b) Why is it wise to imitate the faith of
Noah today?
42

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  NOAH

that sense, his faith condemned the world of his day;
it cast the wickedness of his generation in a clear
light. His faith kept him and his family safe. If you
imitate the faith of Noah, you may likewise do yourself and those you love a world of good. Like Noah,
you can walk with Jehovah God as your Friend. And
the friendship can last forever!

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? Noah and his wife faced what challenges in
raising their children?
? How did Noah show faith in building the ark?
? Why must preaching have been a di?cult
assignment in Noah’s day?
? In what ways are you determined to imitate the
faith of Noah?

HE “WALKED WITH THE TRUE GOD”

43

CHAPTER THREE

“The Father of All Those Having Faith”
ABRAM looked up, his gaze drawn to the ziggurat
that loomed over his home city of Ur.1 There was a
clamor up there, and smoke was rising. The priests
of the moon god were o?ering sacri?ces again. Picture Abram turning away and shaking his head, a
frown creasing his brow. As he made his way homeward through the throngs on the streets, he likely
thought about the idolatry that pervaded Ur. How
the stain of that corrupt worship had spread in the
world since Noah’s day!
Noah died just two years before Abram was born.
When Noah and his family emerged from the ark af2

ter the great Deluge, that patriarch o?ered up a sacri?ce to Jehovah God, who, in turn, made a rainbow
appear. (Gen. 8:20; 9:12-14) At that time, the only
worship in the world was pure worship. But now,
1 Years later, God changed Abram’s name to Abraham, meaning
“Father of a Multitude.”—Gen. 17:5.

1, 2. How had the world changed since Noah’s day, and how was Abram
a?ected?
44

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

as the tenth generation from Noah was spreading
abroad in the earth, pure worship was becoming a
rarity. People everywhere were worshipping pagan
gods. Even Abram’s father, Terah, was involved in
idolatry, perhaps making idols.—Josh. 24:2.
3 Abram was di?erent. As his life went on, he stood
out more and more because of his faith. In fact, the
apostle Paul was later inspired to call him “the father of all those having faith”! (Read Romans 4:11.)
Let us see how Abram began his journey to become
such a man. We ourselves can thereby learn much
about how to grow in faith.
S erving Jehovah in the Post-Flood World
4 How did Abram come to learn about Jehovah
God? We know that Jehovah had faithful servants on
earth in those days. Shem was such a man. Though
not the eldest of Noah’s three sons, he is often mentioned ?rst. That was evidently because Shem was
a man of outstanding faith.1 Some time after the
1 Similarly, Abram is often mentioned ?rst among Terah’s sons,
although he was far from being the eldest.

3. As Abram’s life went on, what quality stood out in him, and what
can we learn from that?
4, 5. From whom might Abram have learned about Jehovah, and why
may we conclude that this is a possibility?
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

45

Flood, Noah referred to Jehovah as “Shem’s God.”
(Gen. 9:26) Shem showed respect for Jehovah and
for pure worship.
Did Abram know Shem? It is possible that he did.
Imagine Abram as a boy. How fascinated he would
have been to learn that he had a living ancestor
whose ancient, wise eyes had witnessed over four
centuries of human history! Shem had seen the
evils of the pre-Flood world, the great Deluge that
cleansed the earth, the founding of the ?rst nations
as mankind multiplied in the earth, and the dark
days of Nimrod’s rebellion at the Tower of Babel.
Faithful Shem stayed clear of that rebellion, so when
Jehovah confused the language of the tower-builders,
Shem and his family continued to speak man’s original language, the tongue of Noah. That family included Abram. Surely, then, Abram grew up with a
high regard for Shem. What is more, Shem remained
alive through most of Abram’s long life. So Abram
may have learned about Jehovah from Shem.
5

6

In any event, Abram took to heart the great les-

6. (a) How did Abram show that he had taken to heart the great lesson of the Deluge? (b) What kind of life did Abram and Sarai have
together?
46

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

son of the Deluge. He endeavored to walk with God
as Noah had walked with Him. That is why Abram
rejected idolatry and stood out as di?erent in Ur,
perhaps even in his immediate family. However, he
came to ?nd a wonderful ally in life. He married Sarai, a woman who was exceptional not only for her
beauty but also for her great faith in Jehovah.1
Though childless, that couple no doubt found much
joy in serving Jehovah together. They also adopted
Abram’s orphaned nephew, Lot.
7

Abram never left Jehovah for the idolatry of Ur.

He and Sarai were willing to stand out as di?erent
from that idolatrous community. If we are to develop genuine faith, we need a similar spirit. We too
must be willing to be di?erent. Jesus said that his
followers would be “no part of the world” and that
the world would hate them as a result. (Read John 15:
19.) If you ever feel the pain of rejection by members of your family or your community because of
your decision to serve Jehovah, remember that you
1 Later, God changed Sarai’s name to Sarah, meaning “Princess.”
—Gen. 17:15.

7. How do followers of Jesus need to imitate Abram?
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

47

are not alone. You are in good company, walking
with God as did Abram and Sarai before you.
8

“Go Out From Your Land”
One day, Abram had an unforgettable experience.

He received a communication from Jehovah God!
The Bible provides little in the way of speci?cs, but
it does say that “the God of glory” appeared to that
faithful man. (Read Acts 7:2, 3.) Perhaps by means of
an angelic representative, Abram received a glimpse
of the overwhelming glory of the Sovereign of the
universe. We can only imagine how thrilled Abram
was to see the contrast between the living God and
the lifeless idols worshipped among his contemporaries.
9

What was Jehovah’s message to Abram? “Go out

from your land and from your relatives and come on
into the land I shall show you.” Jehovah did not say
which land he had in mind—only that he would show
it to Abram. First, though, Abram would have to
leave behind his homeland and his relatives. In the
8, 9. (a) Abram had what unforgettable experience? (b) What was Jehovah’s message to Abram?
48

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

cultures of the ancient Middle East, family meant a
great deal. For a man to leave his relatives and move
far away was often considered a terrible fate; to
some, worse than death itself!
10

Leaving his land involved sacri?ce. Ur was evi-

dently a bustling, wealthy city. (See the box “The
City That Abram and Sarai Left Behind.”) Excavations have revealed that very comfortable homes existed in ancient Ur; some had a dozen or more rooms
for family and servants, all arranged around a paved
inner courtyard. Common amenities included water
fountains, lavatories, and waste disposal. Remember,
too, that Abram and Sarai were far from young; he
was likely in his 70’s, she in her 60’s. He surely wanted Sarai to be reasonably comfortable and well cared
for—what any good husband wants for his wife.
Imagine their conversations about this assignment,
the questions and concerns that might have arisen in
their hearts. Abram must have been so pleased when
Sarai rose to this challenge! Like him, she was willing to leave all the comforts of home behind.
10. Why might it have been a sacri?ce for Abram and Sarai to leave
their home in Ur?
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

49

The City That Abram and S arai Left B ehind
Jehovah’s organization has long worked hard to bring
color and life to discussions of Bible characters and
their background. For example, this description of
the city that Abram and Sarai left behind appeared in
the May 22, 1988, issue of Awake! magazine:
“HALFWAY between the Persian Gulf and the city
of Baghdad there is an unsightly pile of mud bricks. It
is but a lonely sentinel keeping watch over a vast
stretch of sterile desert. Pummeled by dust storms
and baked by a hostile sun, the brooding ruins sit in
austere silence that is broken only by the occasional
howl of a nocturnal creature. This is all that remains
of the once mighty city of Ur.
“But go back four millenniums. There, on what was
then the eastern bank of the Euphrates River, Ur is
a thriving city! Gleaming whitewashed houses and
shops line its winding streets. Merchants and patrons
haggle over prices in the bazaars. Workers labor day
and night spinning milk-white thread from billowy
bundles of wool. Slaves tramp down creaking ships’
ramps, bowing under the weight of imported treasures.
“All this bustle takes place in the shadow of a towering ziggurat that dominates the city’s landscape.
50

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

Worshippers come to this sanctuary to render homage to a deity they believe has brought prosperity to
Ur—the moon-god Nanna, or Sin.
“To one man, though, the odor of sacri?ces o?ered
atop this massive pyramid is an unholy stench. His
name is Abram.”

With the decision made, Abram and Sarai had
much to do. A great deal of packing and organizing
lay ahead of them. What would they take on this
journey into the unknown, and what would they
leave behind? More important, though, were the people in their lives. What would they do about aged
Terah? They decided to take him and care for him
along the way. He may have consented heartily, for
the account credits him, as patriarch, with taking his
family out of Ur. No doubt he had given up idolatry. Abram’s nephew Lot would also accompany the
sojourners.—Gen. 11:31.
11

Finally, the morning of departure was upon
them. Picture the caravan assembling outside the
city walls and moat of Ur. The camels and donkeys
12

11, 12. (a) What preparations and decisions needed to be made prior
to leaving Ur? (b) How might we picture the morning of departure?
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

51

were laden, the ?ocks were assembled, the family
and servants were settled into their places, and a
sense of expectation was in the air.1 Perhaps all eyes
turned to Abram, waiting for him to give the signal
to go. Finally, the moment arrived, and they set o?,
leaving Ur behind forever.
13

Today, many servants of Jehovah decide to move

to where there is a need for more Kingdom preachers. Others decide to learn a new language in order
to expand their ministry. Or they decide to try some
form of service that is outside their comfort zone.
Such decisions generally require sacri?ce—a willingness to forgo some measure of material comfort.
How commendable that spirit is, and how like the
spirit of Abram and Sarai! If we show such faith, we
may be assured that Jehovah will always give us far
more than we give him. He never fails to reward
faith. (Heb. 6:10; 11:6) Did he do so for Abram?
1 Some scholars question whether the camel was domesticated in
Abram’s time. However, the grounds for such objections are weak.
The Bible several times mentions camels among Abram’s possessions.—Gen. 12:16; 24:35.

13. How do many servants of Jehovah today show a spirit similar to
that of Abram and Sarai?
52

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

A Vital Date in Bible History
The date on which Abram crossed the Euphrates River is important in Bible chronology. Other key events
transpired on that date in later years. Exactly 430
years later, on Nisan 14, 1513 B.C.E., Jehovah freed
Israel from bondage to Egypt so that they could go
and claim the land that God had promised to Abram.
(Ex. 12:40, 41; Gal. 3:17) And on that same date
in 33 C.E., Jesus gathered his apostles together and
established with them a covenant that made them
part of a government in heaven that will soon solve
all mankind’s ills. (Luke 22:29) To this day, Jehovah’s Witnesses gather each year to commemorate
the Lord’s Evening Meal on the same date of the Jewish calendar—Nisan 14.—Luke 22:19.

14

Crossing the Euphrates
The caravan gradually settled into the routine of

travel. We might imagine Abram and Sarai alternating between riding and walking, their conversation
mingling with the tinkling of bells hanging from
the animals’ harnesses. Gradually, even the less experienced travelers became more adept at making
14, 15. What was the journey from Ur to Haran like, and why might
Abram have decided to settle in Haran for a time?
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

53

and breaking camp and helping aged Terah to get
comfortably situated atop a camel or a donkey. They
made their way northwest, following the great arc of
the Euphrates River. Days stretched into weeks, and
the landscape slid slowly by.
15

Finally, after some 600 miles on the road, they

reached the beehive-shaped huts of Haran, a prosperous city on a crossroads of the East-West trade
routes. There the family stopped, and there they settled for a time. Perhaps Terah was too frail to travel any farther.
16

In time, Terah died at the age of 205. (Gen. 11:

32) Abram found great comfort during that time of
loss, for Jehovah again communicated with him. He
repeated the instructions that he had given back in
Ur, and he enlarged on his promises. Abram was to
become “a great nation,” and blessings would become available to all the families on earth because
of him. (Read Genesis 12:2, 3.) Thrilled over this covenant between him and God, Abram knew that it
was time to move on.
16, 17. (a) Abram was thrilled by what covenant? (b) How did Jehovah
bless Abram during his stay in Haran?
54

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

17

This time, though, there was even more to pack,

for Jehovah had blessed Abram during his stay in
Haran. The account mentions “all the goods that
they had accumulated and the souls whom they had
acquired in Haran.” (Gen. 12:5) To become a nation,
Abram would need material resources and servants
—a large household. Jehovah does not always make
his servants rich, but he does give them whatever
they need in order to accomplish his will. Thus forti?ed, Abram led his caravan into the unknown.
18

Several days’ journey from Haran lay Carche-

mish, where caravans commonly crossed the Euphrates. Perhaps it was at this spot that Abram reached
a milestone in the history of God’s dealings with
His people. It was evidently on the 14th day of
the month later named Nisan, in 1943 B.C.E., that
Abram led his caravan across the river. (Ex. 12:4043) To the south stretched the land that Jehovah had
promised to show Abram. On that day, God’s covenant with Abram went into e?ect.
18. (a) When did Abram reach a milestone in the history of God’s dealings with His people? (b) What other important events transpired on
Nisan 14 in later years? (See the box “A Vital Date in Bible History.”)
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

55

19

Abram moved southward through the land, and

the caravan stopped near the big trees of Moreh,
near Shechem. There Abram once more received
word from Jehovah. God’s promise this time mentioned Abram’s seed, or progeny, who would take
possession of the land. Did Abram think back to the
prophecy Jehovah had uttered in Eden, the one mentioning a “seed,” or o?spring, who would one day rescue mankind? (Gen. 3:15; 12:7) Perhaps. He may have
begun to see, however dimly, that he was part of a
grand purpose that Jehovah had in mind.
20

Abram deeply appreciated the privilege that Je-

hovah bestowed on him. As he moved through the
land—no doubt cautiously, since it was still inhabited by the Canaanites—Abram stopped and built altars to Jehovah, ?rst near the big trees of Moreh,
then near Bethel. He called on the name of Jehovah,
likely expressing his heartfelt thanks to his God
as he contemplated the future of his progeny. He
19. Jehovah’s promise to Abram included a mention of what, and of
what might that have reminded Abram?
20. How did Abram show appreciation for the privilege that Jehovah
bestowed on him?
56

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

may also have preached to his Canaanite neighbors.
(Read Genesis 12:7, 8.) Of course, great challenges to
Abram’s faith lay ahead on his life’s journey. Wisely,
Abram was not looking back to the home and comforts he had left behind in Ur. He was looking forward. Hebrews 11:10 says of Abram: “He was awaiting the city having real foundations, the builder and
maker of which city is God.”
21

We who serve Jehovah today know a lot more

about that ?gurative city—God’s Kingdom—than
did Abram. We know that the Kingdom is reigning
in heaven and will soon bring an end to this world
system, and we know that Abram’s long-promised
Seed, Jesus Christ, now rules that Kingdom. What a
privilege it will be for us to see the time when Abraham lives again and at last grasps the divine purpose that he could formerly see only in hazy outline! Would you like to see Jehovah ful?ll his every
promise? By all means, then, continue to do what
Abram did. Show a spirit of self-sacri?ce, obedience,
and prayerful appreciation for the privileges Jehovah
21. How does our knowledge of God’s Kingdom compare with that of
Abram, and what are you motivated to do?
“THE FATHER OF ALL THOSE HAVING FAITH”

57

extends to you. As you imitate Abram’s faith, “the
father of all those having faith” will, in a sense, become your father too!

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Abram show faith when it came to
idolatry?
? What impresses you about Abram’s willingness
to leave Ur?
? Abram’s faith brought him what blessings and
privileges?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the
faith of Abram?

58

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABRAM

CHAPTER FOUR

“Where You Go I Shall Go”
RUTH walked b eside Naomi on a road that
stretched across the high, windswept plains of
Moab. They were alone now, two tiny ?gures in a
vast landscape. Imagine Ruth noticing that the afternoon shadows had lengthened, then looking at her
mother-in-law and wondering if it was time to ?nd
a place to rest for the night. She loved Naomi dearly and would do all she could to care for her.
Each woman bore a heavy burden of grief. Naomi had been a widow for years now, but she was
mourning more recent losses—the deaths of her two
sons, Chilion and Mahlon. Ruth too was grieving.
Mahlon was her husband. She and Naomi were
heading to the same destination, the town of Bethlehem in Israel. In a way, though, their journeys differed. Naomi was going home. Ruth was venturing into the unknown, leaving her own kin, her
2

1, 2. (a) Describe the journey of Ruth and Naomi and the burden of
grief they carried. (b) How did Ruth’s journey di?er from that of Naomi?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

59

homeland, and all its customs—including its gods—
behind her.—Read Ruth 1:3-6.
3

What would move a young woman to make such

a drastic change? How would Ruth ?nd the strength
to make a new life for herself and to take care of
Naomi? In learning the answers, we will ?nd much
to imitate in the faith of Ruth the Moabitess. (See
also the box “A Masterpiece in Miniature.”) First,
let us consider how those two women came to be on
that long road to Bethlehem.
4

A Family Torn Apart by Tragedy
Ruth grew up in Moab, a small country that lay

to the east of the Dead Sea. The region consisted mostly of high, sparsely wooded tablelands cut
through by deep ravines. “The ?elds of Moab” often
proved to be fertile farmland, even when famine
stalked Israel. That, in fact, was why Ruth ?rst came
into contact with Mahlon and his family.—Ruth 1:1.
5

A famine in Israel had convinced Naomi’s hus-

3. The answers to what questions will help us to imitate the faith of
Ruth?
4, 5. (a) Why did Naomi’s family move to Moab? (b) What challenges
did Naomi face in Moab?
60

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

band, Elimelech, that he must move his wife and two
sons away from their homeland and take up living in
Moab as aliens. The move must have presented challenges to the faith of each family member, for Israelites needed to worship regularly at the sacred
place Jehovah had designated. (Deut. 16:16, 17) Naomi managed to keep her faith alive. Still, she was
grief-stricken when her husband died.—Ruth 1:2, 3.
6

Naomi might well have su?ered again later when

her sons married Moabite women. (Ruth 1:4) She
knew that her nation’s forefather, Abraham, went to
great lengths to procure a wife for his son, Isaac,
from among his own people, who worshipped Jehovah. (Gen. 24:3, 4) Later, the Mosaic Law warned
the Israelites not to let their sons and daughters
marry foreigners, for fear that God’s people would
be led into idolatry.—Deut. 7:3, 4.
7

Nevertheless, Mahlon and Chilion married Mo-

abite women. If Naomi was concerned or disappointed, she evidently made sure that she showed
6, 7. (a) Why might Naomi have been concerned when her sons married Moabite women? (b) Why was Naomi’s treatment of her
daughters-in-law commendable?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

61

her daughters-in-law, Ruth and Orpah, genuine kindness and love. Perhaps she hoped that they too
would someday come to worship Jehovah as she did.
At any rate, both Ruth and Orpah were fond of Naomi. That good relationship helped them when tragedy struck. Before either of the young women had
borne children, both became widows.—Ruth 1:5.
8

Did Ruth’s religious background prepare her for

such a tragedy? It is hard to see how it could have.
The Moabites worshipped many gods, the chief
among them being Chemosh. (Num. 21:29) It seems
that the Moabite religion was not exempt from the
brutality and horrors common in those times, including the sacri?ce of children. Anything Ruth
learned from Mahlon or Naomi about the loving
and merciful God of Israel, Jehovah, surely struck
her as a marked contrast. Jehovah ruled through
love, not terror. (Read Deuteronomy 6:5.) In the wake
of her devastating loss, Ruth may have drawn even
closer to Naomi and listened willingly to the older
woman as she spoke about the almighty God, Jeho8. What may have drawn Ruth to Jehovah?
62

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

vah, his wonderful works, and the loving, merciful
way he dealt with his people.
9

Naomi, for her part, was eager for news of her

homeland. One day she heard, perhaps from a traveling merchant, that the famine in Israel was over.
Jehovah had turned his attention to his people.
Bethlehem was again living up to its name, which
means “House of Bread.” Naomi decided to return
home.—Ruth 1:6.
10

What would Ruth and Orpah do? (Ruth 1:7)

They had grown close to Naomi through their
shared ordeal. Ruth in particular, it seems, was
drawn to Naomi’s kindness and her steadfast faith
in Jehovah. The three widows set o? for Judah together.
11

The account of Ruth reminds us that tragedy

and loss beset good, honest people as well as bad.
(Eccl. 9:2, 11) It shows us too that in the face of unbearable loss, we are wise to seek comfort and solace in others—especially those who seek refuge in
9-11. (a) What decision did Naomi, Ruth, and Orpah make? (b) What
can we learn from the tragedies that befell Naomi, Ruth, and Orpah?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

63

Jehovah, the God whom Naomi worshipped.—Prov.
17:17.
12

The Loyal Love of Ruth
As the miles stretched out behind the three wid-

ows, another concern began weighing on Naomi. She
thought of the two young women at her side and of
the love they had shown to her and her sons. She
could not bear the thought of adding to their burdens now. If they left their homeland and came with
her, what could she do for them in Bethlehem?
13

Finally, Naomi spoke up: “Go, return each one

to the house of her mother. May Jehovah exercise
loving-kindness toward you, just as you have exercised it toward the men now dead and toward me.”
She also expressed a hope that Jehovah would reward them with new husbands and new lives. “Then
she kissed them,” the account says, “and they began
to raise their voices and weep.” It is not hard to see
why Ruth and Orpah felt so attached to this kindhearted and unsel?sh woman. Both of them kept in12, 13. Why did Naomi want Ruth and Orpah to go back to their homes
instead of accompanying her, and how did the two young women react
at ?rst?
64

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

sisting: “No, but with you we shall return to your
people.”—Ruth 1:8-10.
Naomi was not so easily persuaded, though. She
reasoned forcefully that there was little that she
14

could do for them in Israel, since she had no husband to provide for her, no sons for them to marry,
and no prospects of either. She revealed that her inability to care for them was a source of real bitterness to her. With Orpah, Naomi’s words hit home.
She had family there in Moab, a mother, and a home
that was waiting for her. It really did seem more
practical to remain in Moab. So, with a heavy heart,
she kissed Naomi good-bye and turned away.—Ruth
1:11-14.
What about Ruth? Naomi’s arguments applied
to her as well. Yet, we read: “As for Ruth, she stuck
15

with her.” Perhaps Naomi had resumed walking on
the road when she noticed that Ruth was trailing
behind her. She remonstrated: “Look! Your widowed sister-in-law has returned to her people and
her gods. Return with your widowed sister-in-law.”
14, 15. (a) To what did Orpah return? (b) How did Naomi try to persuade Ruth to leave her?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

65

(Ruth 1:15) Naomi’s words reveal a vital detail to
the reader. Orpah had returned not only to her people but also to “her gods.” She was content to remain a worshipper of Chemosh and other false gods.
Was that how Ruth felt?
16 As she faced Naomi on that lonely road, Ruth’s
heart was sure and clear. It swelled with love for Naomi—and for the God whom Naomi served. So Ruth
spoke: “Do not plead with me to abandon you, to
turn back from accompanying you; for where you go
I shall go, and where you spend the night I shall
spend the night. Your people will be my people, and
your God my God. Where you die I shall die, and
there is where I shall be buried. May Jehovah do so
to me and add to it if anything but death should
make a separation between me and you.”—Ruth 1:
16, 17.
17 Ruth’s words are remarkable—so much so that
they have long outlived her, echoing down through
some 30 centuries. They perfectly reveal a precious
quality, loyal love. The love that Ruth felt was so
16-18. (a) How did Ruth demonstrate loyal love? (b) What can we learn
from Ruth about loyal love? (See also the pictures of the two women
in the standard edition.)
66

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

strong and so loyal that she would stick with Naomi wherever she went. Only death could separate
them. Naomi’s people would become her own people, for Ruth was ready to leave behind everything
she knew in Moab—even the Moabite gods. Unlike Orpah, Ruth could wholeheartedly say that she
wanted Naomi’s God, Jehovah, to be her own God
as well.1
18

So they traveled on, just the two of them now,

on the long road to Bethlehem. By one estimate, the
journey might have taken as long as a week. Surely,
though, each found in the company of the other
some measure of comfort in the face of grief.
19

There is no shortage of grief in this world. In

our own times, which the Bible calls “critical times
hard to deal with,” we face all manner of losses as
well as grief. (2 Tim. 3:1) The quality we ?nd in
Ruth has thus become more important than ever.
1 It is noteworthy that Ruth did not use only the impersonal title
“God,” as many foreigners might; she also used God’s personal
name, Jehovah. The Interpreter’s Bible comments: “The writer thus
emphasizes that this foreigner is a follower of the true God.”

19. How do you think we can imitate Ruth’s loyal love in our family,
among our friends, and in the congregation?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

67

Loyal love—the kind of love that holds on to its object and simply refuses to let go—is a powerful force
for good in this darkening world. We need it in marriage, we need it in family relations, we need it in
friendships, we need it in the Christian congregation. (Read 1 John 4:7, 8, 20.) As we cultivate that
kind of love, we are imitating the outstanding example of Ruth.
20

Ruth and Naomi in B ethlehem
It is, of course, one thing to put loyal love into

words; it is quite another to prove the quality in action. Ruth had before her the opportunity to show
her loyal love not only to Naomi but also to the God
whom she chose as her own, Jehovah.
21

The two women ?nally reached Bethlehem, a vil-

lage about six miles south of Jerusalem. Naomi and
her family, it seems, had once been quite prominent
in that little town, for the whole place was buzzing
with the news of Naomi’s return. The women there
would peer at her and say, “Is this Naomi?” Evident20-22. (a) How had Naomi’s life in Moab a?ected her? (b) Naomi held
what mistaken view of her hardships? (See also James 1:13.)
68

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

A Masterpiece in Miniature
The book of Ruth has been described as a small
gem, a masterpiece in miniature. Granted, the book
has neither the sweep nor the scope of the book of
Judges, which precedes it and provides the time setting for Ruth. (Ruth 1:1) Both books were evidently
written by the prophet Samuel. Yet, as you read
through the Bible, you may agree that the book of
Ruth is beautifully placed in the Bible canon. After
reading of the wars, raids, and counterraids recorded in the book of Judges, you come to this little
book that reminds us that Jehovah never loses sight
of peaceable people struggling with everyday problems. This simple domestic drama o?ers profound
lessons about love, loss, faith, and loyalty that can
bene?t us all.

ly, her sojourn in Moab had left her much changed;
her countenance and bearing showed the mark of
years of hardship and grief.—Ruth 1:19.
22

To those kinswomen and neighbors of years

past, Naomi revealed how bitter her life had
become to her. She even felt that her name
should be changed from Naomi, which means “My
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

69

Pleasantness,” to Mara, which means “Bitter.” Poor
Naomi! Much like Job before her, she believed that
Jehovah God had brought her hardships on her.
—Ruth 1:20, 21; Job 2:10; 13:24-26.
23

As the two women settled into life in Bethlehem,

Ruth began thinking about how best to take care of
herself and Naomi. She learned that the Law that
Jehovah had given to his people in Israel included a
loving provision for the poor. They were allowed to
go into the ?elds at harvesttime and follow the reapers, gleaning what was left behind as well as what
grew at the edges and corners of the ?elds.1—Lev.
19:9, 10; Deut. 24:19-21.
24

It was the time of the barley harvest, likely in

April by our modern calendar, and Ruth went to the
1 It was a remarkable law, surely unlike anything Ruth knew in
her homeland. In the ancient Near East in those days, widows
were treated badly. Notes one reference work: “After her husband’s
death, normally a widow had to rely on her sons for support; if she
had none, she might have to sell herself into slavery, resort to prostitution, or die.”

23. What did Ruth begin to think about, and what provision did the
Mosaic Law make for the poor? (See also footnote.)
24, 25. What did Ruth do when she chanced upon the ?elds of B oaz,
and what was the gleaning work like?
70

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

?elds to see who would let her work under the provision for gleaners. She chanced upon the ?elds of
a man named Boaz, a wealthy landowner and a relative of Naomi’s dead husband, Elimelech. Though
the Law gave her the right to glean, she did not take
it for granted; she asked the young man in charge of
the harvesters for permission to work. He granted
it, and then Ruth got right to work.—Ruth 1:22–2:
3, 7.
25

Imagine Ruth following the harvesters. As they

cut through the barley with their ?int sickles, she
stooped to pick up what they dropped or left behind,
bundled the stalks into sheaves, and carried them o?
to a spot where she could beat out the grain later.
It was slow, tiring work, and it got harder as the
morning wore on. Yet, Ruth kept at it, stopping only
to wipe the sweat from her brow and to eat a simple lunch in “the house”—likely a shelter set up to
provide shade for the workers.
26

Ruth probably neither hoped nor expected to be

noticed, but she was. Boaz saw her and asked the
26, 27. What kind of a person was B oaz, and how did he treat Ruth?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

71

young foreman who she was. A remarkable man of
faith, Boaz greeted his workers—some of whom may
have been day laborers or even foreigners—with the
words: “Jehovah be with you.” And they responded
in kind. This spiritually-minded older man took a fatherly interest in Ruth.—Ruth 2:4-7.
Calling her “my daughter,” Boaz advised Ruth
to keep coming to his ?elds to glean and to stay near
the young women of his household to avoid being
harassed by any of the workmen. He made sure that
she had food to eat at lunchtime. (Read Ruth 2:8, 9,
14.) Above all, though, he sought to commend and
encourage her. How so?
27

When Ruth asked Boaz what she, a foreigner,
had done to deserve his kind favor, he replied that
he had heard about all that she had done for her
28

mother-in-law, Naomi. Likely Naomi had praised her
beloved Ruth among the women of Bethlehem, and
word had reached Boaz. He knew, too, that Ruth had
turned to the worship of Jehovah, for he said: “May
Jehovah reward the way you act, and may there
28, 29. (a) What kind of reputation did Ruth have? (b) How can you,
like Ruth, take refuge in Jehovah?
72

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

come to be a perfect wage for you from Jehovah the
God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to
seek refuge.”—Ruth 2:12.
How those words must have encouraged Ruth!
She had, indeed, decided to take refuge under the
wings of Jehovah God, like a young bird securely
nestled against a protective parent. She thanked
Boaz for speaking to her so reassuringly. And she
kept on working until evening fell.—Ruth 2:13, 17.
29

Ruth’s faith in action is an excellent example for
all of us today who struggle in these di?cult economic times. She did not think that others owed her
anything, so she appreciated everything that was offered her. She felt no shame in working long and
hard to care for one she loved, even though it was
humble work. She gratefully accepted and applied
wise advice about how to work safely and in good
company. Most important, she never lost sight of
where her true refuge lay—with her protective Father, Jehovah God.
30

31

If we show loyal love as Ruth did and follow her

30, 31. What can we learn from Ruth about work habits, appreciation,
and loyal love?
“WHERE YOU GO I SHALL GO”

73

example in humility, industriousness, and appreciation, we will ?nd that our faith too will become a
helpful example for others. How, though, did Jehovah provide for Ruth and Naomi? We will discuss
the matter in the following chapter.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Ruth express her faith in Jehovah
God?
? How did Ruth show loyal love?
? Why did Jehovah value Ruth?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the
faith of Ruth?

74

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

CHAPTER FIVE

“An Excellent Woman”
RUTH knelt by the pile of barley stalks she had
gathered during the day. Evening was descending on
the ?elds around Bethlehem, and many workers were
already wending their way up to the gate of the little city perched atop a nearby ridge. Ruth’s muscles
surely protested the long day’s labor, for she had
been working steadily since the morning. Still she
kept at it, swinging a small rod or ?ail down onto
the stalks to loosen the grains. All in all, it had been
a good day—better than she could ever have hoped
for.
Were things ?nally starting to look up for this
young widow? As we saw in the preceding chapter,
she had attached herself to her mother-in-law, Naomi, vowing to stick with her and to make Naomi’s
God, Jehovah, her own God. Together the two bereaved women had come to Bethlehem from Moab,
and Ruth the Moabitess soon learned that Jehovah’s
2

1, 2. (a) What kind of work was Ruth doing? (b) Ruth learned of what
positive aspects of God’s Law and his people?
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

75

Law made practical, digni?ed provisions for the poor
in Israel, including foreigners. And now she found
that some of Jehovah’s people, who lived under the
Law and were trained by it, showed a degree of spirituality and kindness that touched her wounded
heart.
3

One such person was Boaz, the wealthy older

man in whose ?elds she was gleaning. He had taken
fatherly notice of her today. She could not help but
smile inwardly when she thought of his kind words
praising her for caring for Naomi and for choosing
to seek refuge under the wings of the true God, Jehovah.—Read Ruth 2:11-14.
4

Still, Ruth may have wondered about the life

ahead of her. As an impoverished foreigner with neither husband nor child, how would she support herself and Naomi in the years ahead? Would gleaning
su?ce? And who would take care of her when she
grew old? It would be understandable if such concerns weighed on her mind. In today’s hard economic times, many struggle with similar anxieties. As we
3, 4. (a) How had B oaz encouraged Ruth? (b) How can Ruth’s example help us in today’s hard economic times?
76

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

learn how Ruth’s faith helped her through such challenges, we will ?nd much to imitate.
5

What Makes a Family?
By the time Ruth ?nished beating out the grain

and collecting it all together, she found that she had
gleaned about an ephah measure, or 20 dry quarts, of
barley. Her load may have weighed some 30 pounds!
She hoisted it, perhaps bundling it in a cloth and carrying it on her head, and then made her way to Bethlehem in the gathering darkness.—Ruth 2:17.
6

Naomi was pleased to see her beloved daughter-

in-law, and perhaps she gasped in surprise as she saw
Ruth’s heavy load of barley. Ruth also brought some
food left over from the meal that Boaz had provided for the workers, and the two thus shared a simple meal. Naomi asked: “Where did you glean today,
and where did you work? May the one who took notice of you become blessed.” (Ruth 2:19) Naomi was
attentive; she saw proof in Ruth’s heavy load of provisions that someone had taken notice of the young
widow and had treated her kindly.
5, 6. (a) How successful was Ruth’s ?rst day of gleaning in the ?eld of
B oaz? (b) How did Naomi react when she saw Ruth?
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

77

7

The two fell to conversing, and Ruth told Naomi

about the kindness of Boaz. Moved, Naomi replied:
“Blessed be he of Jehovah, who has not left o? his
loving-kindness toward the living and the dead.”
(Ruth 2:20) She saw the kindness of Boaz as coming
from Jehovah, who moves his servants to be generous and promises to reward his people for the kindness they show.1—Read Proverbs 19:17.
8

Naomi urged Ruth to accept Boaz’ o?er to keep

gleaning in his ?elds and to stay near the young
women of his own household so that she would escape harassment from the reapers. Ruth took that
advice. She also “kept on dwelling with her motherin-law.” (Ruth 2:22, 23) In those words we see once
more her hallmark quality—loyal love. Ruth’s example may move us to ask ourselves whether we honor
1 As Naomi noted, Jehovah’s kindness is not restricted to the living; it even extends to the dead. Naomi had lost her husband and
both sons. Ruth had lost her husband. Surely all three men had
meant a great deal to both women. Any kindness shown to Naomi
and Ruth was, in e?ect, kindness to the men who would have wanted those dear women to be cared for.

7, 8. (a) Naomi saw the kindness of B oaz as coming from whom, and
why? (b) How did Ruth further show her loyal love toward her motherin-law?
78

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

the bonds of family, loyally supporting our loved
ones and o?ering them help as needed. Jehovah never fails to notice such loyal love.
9

Were Ruth and Naomi somehow less than a fam-

ily? Some assume that there must be someone to
?ll each role—husband, wife, son, daughter, grandparent, and so forth—for a family to be “real.” But
the examples of Ruth and Naomi remind us that servants of Jehovah can open their hearts and make
even the smallest of families glow with warmth,
kindness, and love. Do you appreciate what family
you have? Jesus reminded his followers that the
Christian congregation can provide family even for
those who have none.—Mark 10:29, 30.
“He Is One of Our Repurchasers”
10 From the barley harvest in April until the wheat
harvest in June, Ruth kept gleaning in the ?elds
of Boaz. As the weeks passed, Naomi no doubt
thought more about what she could do for her beloved daughter-in-law. Back in Moab, Naomi had
been convinced that she could never help Ruth ?nd
9. What can we learn from Ruth and Naomi about family?
10. In what way did Naomi want to help Ruth?
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

79

another husband. (Ruth 1:11-13) Now, though, she
was beginning to think di?erently. She approached
Ruth and said: “My daughter, ought I not to look for
a resting-place for you?” (Ruth 3:1) It was customary
in those days for parents to ?nd mates for their children, and Ruth had become a true daughter to Naomi. She wanted to ?nd Ruth “a resting-place”—referring to the security and protection that a home and
a husband might provide. But what could Naomi do?
11

When Ruth ?rst mentioned Boaz, Naomi said:

“The man is related to us. He is one of our repurchasers.” (Ruth 2:20) What did that mean? God’s
Law to Israel included loving provisions for families
who as a result of poverty or bereavement fell on
hard times. If a woman was widowed while still
childless, she was especially devastated because her
husband’s name, his posterity, would be cut o?, lost
to future generations. However, God’s Law allowed
the man’s brother to marry the widow so that she
could give birth to an heir who might carry on her
11, 12. (a) When Naomi called B oaz a “repurchaser,” to what loving
provision of God’s Law was she referring? (b) How did Ruth respond
to her mother-in-law’s advice?
80

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

deceased husband’s name and care for the family
property.1—Deut. 25:5-7.
12

Naomi related to Ruth a plan of action. We

might imagine the young woman’s eyes widening as
her mother-in-law spoke. Israel’s Law was still new
to Ruth, and many of its customs were still quite foreign to her. Even so, she held Naomi in such high regard that she listened carefully to every word. What
Naomi advised her to do might have seemed awkward or embarrassing—even potentially humiliating—yet Ruth agreed. She meekly said: “All that you
say to me I shall do.”—Ruth 3:5.
13

Sometimes it is di?cult for young people to lis-

ten to the advice of those who are older and more
experienced. It is easy to assume that older ones do
not really understand the challenges and problems
the young face. Ruth’s humble example reminds us
that listening to the wisdom of older ones who love
us and have our best interests at heart can be very
1 The right to marry such a widow was evidently extended ?rst to
the deceased man’s brothers and then to the nearest male relatives,
as was the right to inheritance.—Num. 27:5-11.

13. What lesson can we learn from Ruth about accepting advice from
older ones? (See also Job 12:12.)
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

81

rewarding. (Read Psalm 71:17, 18.) But what was
Naomi’s advice, and was Ruth really rewarded for
heeding it?
Ruth at the Threshing Floor
14 That evening, Ruth made her way to the threshing ?oor—a ?at, hard-packed area where a number
of farmers would take their grain for threshing and
winnowing. The spot chosen was usually on a hillside or hilltop, where the breezes were strong in the
late afternoon and early evening. To release the grain
from the cha? and straw, workers used big forks or
shovels to toss the mixture into the wind, which carried o? the lighter cha? and allowed the heavier
grains to fall back to the ?oor.
Ruth watched discreetly as the work wound
down in the evening. Boaz oversaw the winnowing
of his grain, which grew into a great heap. After eating heartily, he lay down at one end of the heap. This
was evidently a common practice, perhaps designed
to protect the precious harvest from thieves and ma15

14. What was a threshing ?oor, and how was it used?
15, 16. (a) Describe the scene at the threshing ?oor as B oaz ?nished
working for the evening. (b) How did B oaz discover that Ruth was lying
at his feet?
82

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

rauders. Ruth saw Boaz settling down for the night.
The time had come to put Naomi’s plan into action.
16

Ruth crept closer, her heart racing. She could

tell that the man was sound asleep. So just as Naomi had said, she went over to his feet, uncovered
them, and lay down by them. Then she waited. The
time passed. To Ruth, it must have felt like an eternity. Finally, around midnight, Boaz began to stir.
Trembling from the cold, he stretched forward, likely to cover his feet up again. But he sensed that
someone was there. As the account reads, “Look! a
woman lying at his feet!”—Ruth 3:8.
17

“Who are you?” he asked. Ruth replied, perhaps

with a tremor in her voice: “I am Ruth your slave
girl, and you must spread out your skirt over your
slave girl, for you are a repurchaser.” (Ruth 3:9)
Some modern interpreters have sought to imply that
there were some sexual undertones in Ruth’s actions
and words, but they ignore two simple facts. First,
Ruth was acting according to the customs of the day,
many of which are long lost to us. So it would be a
17. Those who imply that there was something improper in Ruth’s actions ignore what two simple facts?
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

83

mistake to view her actions through the warped lens
of today’s debased moral standards. Second, Boaz responded in a way that clearly shows that he saw
Ruth’s conduct as morally chaste and highly commendable.
18

Boaz spoke, and no doubt his gentle, soothing

tone comforted Ruth. He said: “Blessed may you be
of Jehovah, my daughter. You have expressed your
loving-kindness better in the last instance than in the
?rst instance, in not going after the young fellows
whether lowly or rich.” (Ruth 3:10) “The ?rst instance” referred to Ruth’s loyal love in accompanying Naomi back to Israel and caring for her. “The
last instance” was the present one. Boaz noted that
a young woman like Ruth might easily have sought
a husband among much younger men, whether rich
or poor. Rather, she wanted to do good not only to
Naomi but also to Naomi’s deceased husband, to
carry on the dead man’s name in his homeland. It is
not hard to see why Boaz was moved by this young
woman’s unsel?shness.
18. What did B oaz say to comfort Ruth, and to what two instances of
her loving-kindness did he refer?
84

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

19

Boaz continued: “And now, my daughter, do not

be afraid. All that you say I shall do for you, for
everyone in the gate of my people is aware that you
are an excellent woman.” (Ruth 3:11) He was pleased
at the prospect of marrying Ruth; perhaps he was
not completely surprised to be asked to be her repurchaser. However, Boaz was a righteous man, and
he was not about to act merely on his own preferences. He told Ruth that there was another repurchaser, one more closely related to the family of
Naomi’s dead husband. Boaz would approach that
man ?rst and give him the opportunity to become
Ruth’s husband.
20

Boaz urged Ruth to lie down again and rest un-

til morning was near; then she could slip away unnoticed. He wanted to protect her reputation as well
as his own, since people might wrongly assume that
something immoral had taken place. Ruth lay near
the man’s feet again, perhaps with a mind more
at ease after he had responded to her petition so
19, 20. (a) Why did B oaz not marry Ruth right away? (b) In what ways
did B oaz show kindness and sensitivity toward Ruth and her reputation?
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

85

kindly. Then, while it was still dark, she rose. Boaz
?lled her cloak with a generous gift of barley, and
she made her way back into Bethlehem.—Read Ruth
3:13-15.
How satisfying it must have been for Ruth to
contemplate what Boaz had said—that she was
21

known among all the people as “an excellent woman”! No doubt her eagerness to get to know Jehovah
and to serve him had much to do with that reputation. She had also shown great kindness and sensitivity toward Naomi and her people, willingly adapting
to ways and customs that were surely unfamiliar to
her. If we imitate Ruth’s faith, we will seek to treat
others and their ways and customs with deep respect.
If we do, we too may ?nd that we develop a reputation for excellence.
22

A Resting-Place for Ruth
“Who are you, my daughter?” Naomi said when

Ruth arrived home. Perhaps it was the darkness that
21. What contributed to Ruth’s being known as “an excellent woman,”
and how can we imitate her example?
22, 23. (a) What may have been the meaning behind the gift that B oaz
bestowed on Ruth? (See also footnote.) (b) What did Naomi urge Ruth
to do?
86

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

prompted the question, but Naomi also wanted to
know whether Ruth was still the same unattached
widow or one with prospects of marriage before her.
Ruth quickly told her mother-in-law of all that had
passed between her and Boaz. She also presented the
generous gift of barley that Boaz had told her to give
to Naomi.1—Ruth 3:16, 17.
23

Wisely, Naomi urged Ruth to sit at home quiet-

ly that day instead of going out to glean in the ?elds.
She assured Ruth: “The man will have no rest unless
he has brought the matter to an end today.”—Ruth
3:18.
24

Naomi was quite right about Boaz. He went to

the city gate, where the city elders usually met,
and waited until the man who was a closer relative passed by. In front of witnesses, Boaz o?ered
the man the opportunity to act as repurchaser by
1 Boaz gave Ruth six measures of unspeci?ed weight—perhaps to
suggest that just as six work days were followed by a Sabbath rest,
Ruth’s own days of toil as a widow were soon to be followed by the
“rest” that a secure home and a husband could provide. On the other hand, the six measures—perhaps shovelfuls—may simply have
been all that Ruth could carry.

24, 25. (a) How did B oaz show that he was an upright and unsel?sh
man? (b) In what ways was Ruth blessed?
“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

87

marrying Ruth. However, the man refused, claiming
that doing so would ruin his own inheritance. Then,
before the witnesses there at the city gate, Boaz stated that he would act as the repurchaser, buying up
the estate of Naomi’s dead husband, Elimelech, and
marrying Ruth, the widow of Elimelech’s son Mahlon. Boaz declared his hope that doing so would
“cause the name of the dead man to rise upon his inheritance.” (Ruth 4:1-10) Boaz truly was an upright
and unsel?sh man.
Boaz married Ruth. Thereafter, we read: “Jehovah granted her conception and she bore a son.” The
women of Bethlehem blessed Naomi and praised
Ruth for being better to Naomi than seven sons
would have been. Later, we learn, Ruth’s son became
an ancestor of the great King David. (Ruth 4:11-22)
David, in turn, was an ancestor of Jesus Christ.
—Matt. 1:1.1
25

Ruth was blessed indeed, as was Naomi, who
helped to raise the child as if he were her own. The
26

1 Ruth is one of ?ve women whom the Bible lists in the ancestry
of Jesus. Another one is Rahab, who was the mother of Boaz.
(Matt. 1:3, 5, 6, 16) Like Ruth, she was not an Israelite.

26. Of what do the examples of Ruth and Naomi remind us?
88

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  RUTH

lives of these two women stand as vivid reminders
that Jehovah God notices all those who toil humbly
to provide for their own and who serve him loyally
with his chosen people. He never fails to reward
faithful people, such as Boaz, Naomi, and Ruth.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Ruth show loyal love toward Naomi?
? How did Naomi show loyal love toward Ruth?
? Why does Jehovah treasure such servants as
Boaz, Naomi, and Ruth?
? How do you hope to imitate the faith of Ruth?

“AN EXCELLENT WOMAN”

89

CHAPTER SIX

She Opened Her Heart to God in Prayer
HANNAH busied herself with preparations for the
trip, trying to keep her mind occupied. It should
have been a happy time; Elkanah, her husband, customarily took the whole family on these annual journeys to worship at the tabernacle in Shiloh. Jehovah
meant for such occasions to be joyful. (Read Deuteronomy 16:15.) And no doubt Hannah, from her
childhood on, had delighted in those festivals. But
things had changed for her in recent years.
2

She was blessed to have a husband who loved her.

However, Elkanah had another wife. Her name was
Peninnah, and she seemed intent on making Hannah’s life miserable. Peninnah had ?gured out a way
to make even these annual occasions a source of
acute pain for Hannah. How? More to the point, how
did Hannah’s faith in Jehovah help her to cope with
what often seemed like an impossible situation? If
1, 2. (a) Why was Hannah unhappy when preparing for a trip?
(b) What can we learn from Hannah’s story?
90

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

you face challenges that sap you of joy in life, you
may ?nd Hannah’s story particularly moving.

“Why Does Your Heart Feel Bad?”
3 The Bible reveals two big problems in Hannah’s
life. She had little control over the ?rst and none at
all over the second. In the ?rst place, she was in a
polygamous marriage, with a rival wife who hated
her. In the second place, she was barren. That condition is di?cult for any wife who longs to bear children; but in Hannah’s time and culture, it was a
source of intense grief. Each family counted on
o?spring to carry on the family name. Barrenness
seemed a bitter reproach and shame.
4 Hannah might have borne her burden with fortitude had it not been for Peninnah. Polygamy was
never an ideal situation. Rivalry, strife, and heartache were all too common. The practice was far from
the standard of monogamy that God had set in the
garden of Eden. (Gen. 2:24) The Bible thus paints a
grim portrait of polygamy, and the poignant depiction of life within Elkanah’s household is one of the
telling brushstrokes in that picture.
3, 4. What two big problems did Hannah face, and why did each present a challenge?
SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

91

5

Elkanah loved Hannah the most. Jewish tradition

has it that he married Hannah ?rst and that Peninnah came along some years later. At any rate, Peninnah, who was deeply jealous of Hannah, found many
ways to make her rival su?er. Peninnah’s great advantage over Hannah had to do with fertility. Peninnah produced one o?spring after another, and her
self-importance grew with each new child. Instead of
feeling sorry for Hannah and comforting her in her
disappointment, Peninnah played on that sensitive
point. The Bible says that Peninnah vexed Hannah
sorely “for the sake of making her feel disconcerted.”
(1 Sam. 1:6) Peninnah’s actions were deliberate. She
wanted to hurt Hannah, and she succeeded.
6

Peninnah’s favorite opportunity, it seems, came

at the time of the annual pilgrimage to Shiloh. To
each of Peninnah’s many children—“all her sons and
her daughters”—Elkanah gave portions of the sacri5. Why did Peninnah want Hannah to su?er, and how did she hurt Hannah?
6, 7. (a) Despite Elkanah’s attempts to comfort Hannah, why might
she have held back from telling him the whole story? (b) Did Hannah’s
barrenness mean that Jehovah was displeased with her? Explain. (See
footnote.)
92

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

?ces o?ered to Jehovah. Beloved Hannah, though, received a special portion. Jealous Peninnah then so
lorded it over Hannah and reminded her of her barrenness that the poor woman gave way to weeping
and even lost her appetite. Elkanah could not help
but notice that his dear Hannah was distressed and
was not eating, so he attempted to comfort her.
“Hannah,” he asked, “why do you weep, and why do
you not eat, and why does your heart feel bad? Am I
not better to you than ten sons?”—1 Sam. 1:4-8.
7

To his credit, Elkanah discerned that Hannah’s

distress had to do with her barrenness. And Hannah
surely treasured his kind assurances of love.1 But Elkanah did not mention Peninnah’s malice; nor does
the Bible record suggest that Hannah told him of it.
Perhaps she saw that exposing Peninnah would only
make her own situation worse. Would Elkanah really change things? Might not Peninnah’s contempt for
Hannah only deepen, and would not the children and
the servants of that spiteful woman follow suit?
1 Although the Bible record says that Jehovah had ‘closed up Hannah’s womb,’ there is no evidence that God was displeased with this
humble and faithful woman. (1 Sam. 1:5) The Bible at times attributes to God events that he simply allowed to take place for a time.
SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

93

Hannah would only feel more and more like an outcast in her own household.
Whether Elkanah knew the full scope of Peninnah’s petty meanness or not, Jehovah God saw it all.
His Word reveals the whole picture, thus providing a
solemn warning to any who indulge in seemingly minor jealous and hateful acts. On the other hand, the
innocent and the peaceable, like Hannah, can ?nd
comfort in knowing that the God of justice sets all
matters right in his own time and in his own way.
(Read Deuteronomy 32:4.) Perhaps Hannah knew as
much, for it was to Jehovah that she turned for help.
8

“S elf-Concerned No More”
9 In the early hours, the household was bustling.
Everyone was getting ready for the trip, even the children. The journey to Shiloh would take the large family across more than 20 miles of the hilly country of
Ephraim.1 The trek would last a day or two on foot.
1 The distance is based on the likelihood that Elkanah’s hometown, Ramah, was the same place that came to be known as
Arimathea in Jesus’ day.

8. When you face petty meanness or injustice, why is it comforting to
remember that Jehovah is the God of justice?
9. What lesson can we learn from Hannah’s willingness to make the
trip to Shiloh despite knowing how her rival would act?
94

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

Hannah knew how her rival wife would act. However,
Hannah did not stay at home. She thus set a worthy
example for worshippers of God to this day. It is never wise to let the misconduct of others interfere with
our worship of God. Were we to do so, we would
miss out on the very blessings that strengthen us to
endure.
After a long day of walking on winding mountain
roads, the large family at last approached Shiloh.
There it sat, on a hill nearly ringed by higher hills.
As they approached, Hannah likely thought a great
deal about what she would say in prayer to Jehovah.
Once they arrived, the family shared a meal. Hannah
pulled away from the group as soon as she could and
made her way to the tabernacle of Jehovah. High
Priest Eli was there, sitting near the doorpost. But
Hannah’s focus was on her God. Here at the tabernacle, she felt con?dent that she would be heard. If
no one else could fully understand her plight, her Father in heaven could. Her bitterness welled up within her, and she began to weep.
10

10, 11. (a) Why did Hannah make her way to the tabernacle as soon
as she could? (b) How did Hannah pour out her heart to her heavenly
Father in prayer?
SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

95

As the sobs racked her body, Hannah spoke within herself to Jehovah. Her lips quivered as she mentally formed the words to express her pain. And she
prayed at length, pouring out her heart to her Father.
She did more, though, than just ask God to ful?ll her
desperate urge to bear o?spring. Hannah was keen
not only to receive blessings from God but also to
give him what she could. So she made a vow, saying
that if she had a son, she would dedicate the child to
a life of service to Jehovah.—1 Sam. 1:9-11.
12 Hannah thus set an example for all of God’s servants when it comes to prayer. Jehovah kindly invites
his people to speak to him openly, without reservation, pouring out their concerns before him as a
trusting child would to a loving parent. (Read Psalm
62:8; 1 Thessalonians 5:17.) The apostle Peter was inspired to write these comforting words about prayer
to Jehovah: “Throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.”—1 Pet. 5:7.
13 Humans, however, are not as understanding and
11

12. As Hannah’s example illustrates, what should we keep in mind
when it comes to prayer?
13, 14. (a) How did Eli jump to a wrong conclusion about Hannah?
(b) How did Hannah’s response to Eli set a remarkable example of
faith?
96

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

empathetic as Jehovah is. As Hannah wept and
prayed, she was startled by a voice. It was Eli, the
high priest, who had been observing her. He said:
“How long will you behave drunk? Put away your
wine from upon you.” Eli had noticed Hannah’s quivering lips, her sobs, and her emotional demeanor. Instead of inquiring what was wrong, he jumped to the
conclusion that she was drunk.—1 Sam. 1:12-14.
14

How hurtful for Hannah, in that moment of an-

guish, to have to face such a baseless accusation
—and that from a man who held such an honored
position! Nevertheless, she again set a praiseworthy
example of faith. She did not let a man’s imperfections get in the way of her worship of Jehovah. She
answered Eli respectfully and explained her situation. He replied, perhaps in a chastened and softer
tone: “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant
your petition that you have asked of him.”—1 Sam.
1:15-17.
15

What was the e?ect on Hannah of opening her

15, 16. (a) How was Hannah a?ected by opening her heart to Jehovah
and worshipping him at the tabernacle? (b) How might we follow Hannah’s example when we struggle with negative feelings?
SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

97

heart to Jehovah and worshipping him there at his
tabernacle? The account reads: “The woman proceeded to go on her way and to eat, and her face became
self-concerned no more.” (1 Sam. 1:18) The Jerusalem
Bible here reads: “Her countenance was no more sad.”
Hannah felt relieved. She had, in a sense, transferred
the weight of her emotional burden to shoulders in?nitely broader and stronger than her own, those of
her heavenly Father. (Read Psalm 55:22.) Is any problem too heavy for him? No—not then, not now, not
ever!
16

When we feel loaded down, overwhelmed, or

overcome with sadness, we do well to follow Hannah’s example and speak openly to the One whom
the Bible calls the “Hearer of prayer.” (Ps. 65:2) If
we do so in faith, we too may ?nd that our sadness
is replaced by “the peace of God that excels all
thought.”—Phil. 4:6, 7.
17

“There Is No Rock Like Our God”
The next morning, Hannah returned to the tab-

ernacle with Elkanah. She had likely told him of her
17, 18. (a) How did Elkanah prove supportive regarding Hannah’s
vow? (b) What power over Hannah did Peninnah lose?
98

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

request and her commitment, for the Mosaic Law
said that a husband had the right to nullify a vow
made by his wife without his consent. (Num. 30:1015) But that faithful man made no such move. Rather, he and Hannah worshipped Jehovah together at
the tabernacle before heading homeward.
18

Just when did Peninnah realize that she had lost

her power to upset Hannah? The account does not
say, but the expression “self-concerned no more” suggests that Hannah’s spirits rose from that time forward. At any rate, Peninnah soon found that her
spiteful conduct produced no e?ect. The Bible never
mentions her name again.
19

As the months passed, Hannah’s peace of mind

?owered into unbridled delight. She was pregnant! In
her joy, Hannah never for a moment forgot where
this blessing had come from. When the boy was born,
she chose the name Samuel, which means “Name of
God” and evidently refers to calling on the divine
name, as Hannah had done. That year, she did not
join Elkanah and the family for the trek to Shiloh.
19. What blessing did Hannah receive, and how did she show that she
appreciated where that blessing came from?
SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

99

Two Remarkable Prayers
Hannah’s two prayers, recorded at 1 Samuel 1:11
and 2:1-10, contain a number of outstanding features.
Consider just a few:
? Hannah addressed the ?rst of the two prayers to “Jehovah of armies.” She is the ?rst person in the Bible
record to be quoted as using that title. It occurs a total of 285 times in the Bible and refers to God’s command over a vast array of spirit sons.
? Note that Hannah uttered the second prayer, not
when her son was born, but when she and Elkanah offered him up for God’s service at Shiloh. So Hannah’s
great joy lay, not in silencing her rival, Peninnah, but
in being blessed by Jehovah.

She stayed home with the child for three years, until
he was weaned. Then she gathered her strength for
the day on which she would have to part with her beloved son.
The parting could not have been easy. Of course,
Hannah knew that Samuel would be well cared for
in Shiloh, perhaps by the hands of some of the women who served at the tabernacle. Still, he was so
20

20. How did Hannah and Elkanah carry out the promise they had made
to Jehovah?
100

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

? When Hannah said, “My horn is indeed exalted in
Jehovah,” she may have had in mind the ox, a powerful beast of burden that uses its horns mightily. Hannah was, in e?ect, saying: ‘Jehovah, you make me
strong.’—1 Sam. 2:1.
? Hannah’s words about God’s “anointed one” are
considered prophetic. The expression is the same one
rendered “messiah,” and Hannah is the ?rst person in
the Bible record to use it to refer to a future anointed
king.—1 Sam. 2:10.
? Jesus’ mother, Mary, about 1,0 0 0 years later,
echoed some of Hannah’s expressions in her own
words of praise to Jehovah.—Luke 1:46-55. (See
Chapter 17.)

young, and what mother does not long to be with her
child? Nonetheless, Hannah and Elkanah brought the
boy, not begrudgingly, but gratefully. They o?ered
sacri?ces at God’s house, and they presented Samuel to Eli, reminding him of the vow Hannah had
made there years earlier.
Hannah then uttered a prayer that God deemed
worthy of inclusion in his inspired Word. As you read
21

21. How did Hannah’s prayer to Jehovah re?ect the depth of her faith?
(See also the box “Two Remarkable Prayers.”)
SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

101

her words, recorded at 1 Samuel 2:1-10, you will ?nd
the depth of her faith conveyed in every line. She
praised Jehovah for his marvelous use of power—his
unmatched ability to humble the haughty, to bless
the oppressed, and to end life or even to save it from
death. She praised her Father for his unique holiness,
his justice, and his faithfulness. With good reason,
Hannah could say: “There is no rock like our God.”
Jehovah is completely reliable and unchanging, a refuge for all the oppressed and downtrodden who turn
to him for help.
22

Little Samuel was certainly privileged to have a

mother who was so ?lled with faith in Jehovah.
Though he surely missed her as he grew up, he never felt forgotten. Year after year, Hannah would come
back to Shiloh, bringing a sleeveless coat for his service at the tabernacle. Every stitch bore evidence of
her love and care for her son. (Read 1 Samuel 2:19.)
We can just picture her putting the new coat on the
boy, smoothing it out, and looking fondly at him
while speaking kind, encouraging words. Samuel was
22, 23. (a) Why can we be sure that Samuel grew up knowing that his
parents loved him? (b) How did Jehovah further bless Hannah?
102

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  HANNAH

blessed to have such a mother, and he grew up to be
a blessing to his parents and to all of Israel.
23

As for Hannah, she was not forgotten either. Je-

hovah blessed her with fertility, and she bore Elkanah ?ve more children. (1 Sam. 2:21) Perhaps
Hannah’s greatest blessing, though, was the bond between her and her Father, Jehovah, which grew ever
stronger through the years. May the same happen to
you, as you imitate the faith of Hannah.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Hannah show faith despite
opposition?
? How did Hannah’s prayers reveal her faith?
? Why does Jehovah treasure such servants as
Hannah?
? In what ways do you intend to imitate
Hannah’s faith?

SHE OPENED HER HEART TO GOD IN PRAYER

103

CHAPTER SEVEN

He “Continued Growing Up
With Jehovah”
SAMUEL looked into the faces of his people. The
nation had gathered at the town of Gilgal, summoned by this faithful man who had served as
prophet and judge for decades. It was May or June
by modern reckoning; the dry season was well along.
The ?elds in the region were golden with wheat
ready for harvest. Silence fell over the crowd. How
could Samuel reach their hearts?
2 The people did not understand how serious their
situation was. They had insisted on having a human
king to rule over them. They did not grasp that they
had shown gross disrespect to their God, Jehovah,
and to his prophet. They were, in e?ect, rejecting Jehovah as their King! How could Samuel move them
to repentance?
3 Samuel spoke. “I have grown old and gray,” he
1, 2. In what setting did Samuel address the people of Israel, and why
did he need to move them to repentance?
3, 4. (a) Why did Samuel speak of his youth? (b) Why is Samuel’s example of faith useful for us today?
104

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

told the crowd. His whitening hair added weight to
his words. He then said: “I have walked before you
from my youth until this day.” (1 Sam. 11:14, 15;
12:2) Though Samuel was old, he had not forgotten
his youth. His memories of those early days were
still vivid. The decisions he had made back then, as
a growing boy, had led him to a life of faith and devotion to his God, Jehovah.
4 Samuel had to build and maintain faith, although
again and again he was surrounded by people who
were faithless and disloyal. Today, it is just as challenging to build faith, for we live in a faithless and
corrupt world. (Read Luke 18:8.) Let us see what we
can learn from Samuel’s example, starting in his early boyhood.
“Ministering B efore Jehovah, as a B oy”
5 Samuel had an unusual childhood. Shortly after
he was weaned, at perhaps three years of age or a
little more, he began a life of service at the sacred
tabernacle of Jehovah at Shiloh, over 20 miles from
his home in Ramah. His parents, Elkanah and Hannah, dedicated their boy to Jehovah in a special
5, 6. How was Samuel’s childhood unusual, but why were his parents
sure that he was cared for?
HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

105

form of service, making him a lifelong Nazirite.1 Did
this mean that Samuel was cast o?, unloved by his
parents?
Far from it! They knew that their son would be
cared for at Shiloh. High Priest Eli no doubt supervised matters, for Samuel worked closely with him.
There were also a number of women who served in
some connection with the tabernacle, evidently in an
organized way.—Ex. 38:8; Judg. 11:34-40.
6

Furthermore, Hannah and Elkanah never forgot
their beloved ?rstborn, whose very birth was an answer to a prayer. Hannah had asked God for a son,
promising to dedicate the boy to God in a life of
sacred service. When visiting each year, Hannah
brought Samuel a new sleeveless coat she had made
for his tabernacle service. The little boy surely cherished those visits. He no doubt thrived on his parents’ loving encouragement and guidance as they
7

1 Nazirites were under a vow that included a ban on drinking alcoholic beverages and on cutting their hair. Most undertook such
vows for only a set period of time, but a few, such as Samson, Samuel, and John the Baptist, were lifelong Nazirites.

7, 8. (a) Year by year, how did Samuel’s parents give him loving encouragement? (b) What can parents today learn from Samuel’s
parents?
106

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

taught him what a privilege it was to serve Jehovah
in that unique place.
Parents today can learn a lot from Hannah and
Elkanah. It is common for parents to focus all their
childrearing e?orts on material concerns while ignoring spiritual needs. But Samuel’s parents put
spiritual matters ?rst, and that had a great bearing
on the kind of man their son grew up to be.—Read
Proverbs 22:6.
8

We can picture the boy growing bigger and exploring the hills around Shiloh. As he gazed down
on the town and the valley that spread out below it
on one side, his heart likely swelled with joy and
pride when he caught sight of Jehovah’s tabernacle.
That tabernacle was a sacred place indeed.1 Built
9

1 The sanctuary was a rectangular structure, basically a great
tent on a wooden framework. However, it was made of the ?nest
of materials—sealskins, beautifully embroidered cloths, and costly
woods plated with silver and gold. The sanctuary sat within a rectangular courtyard that included an impressive altar for sacri?ces.
Over time, other chambers evidently were erected at the sides of
the tabernacle for the use of the priests. Samuel, it seems, slept in
such a chamber.

9, 10. (a) Describe the tabernacle and young Samuel’s feelings about
that sacred place. (See also footnote.) (b) What might Samuel’s responsibilities have included, and how do you think young ones today
might imitate his example?
HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

107

nearly 400 years earlier under the direction of Moses himself, it was the one center for the pure worship of Jehovah in all the world.
10 Young Samuel grew to love the tabernacle. In
the account he later wrote, we read: “Samuel was
ministering before Jehovah, as a boy, having a linen
ephod girded on.” (1 Sam. 2:18) That simple sleeveless garment evidently indicated that Samuel assisted the priests at the tabernacle. Although not of the
priestly class, Samuel had duties that included opening the doors to the tabernacle courtyard in the
morning and attending to elderly Eli. As much as he
enjoyed the privileges, though, in time his innocent heart became troubled. Something was terribly
wrong at Jehovah’s house.
Staying Pure in the Face of Corruption
11 At a young age, Samuel witnessed genuine wickedness and corruption. Eli had two sons, named
Hophni and Phinehas. Samuel’s account reads: “The
sons of Eli were good-for-nothing men; they did
not acknowledge Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 2:12) The two
11, 12. (a) Hophni and Phinehas manifested what principal failing?
(b) What kind of wickedness and corruption did Hophni and Phinehas
practice at the tabernacle? (See also footnote.)
108

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

thoughts in this verse go hand in hand. Hophni
and Phinehas were “good-for-nothing men”—literally “sons of worthlessness”—because they had no regard for Jehovah. They thought nothing of his righteous standards and requirements. From that one
failing sprang all their other sins.
12 God’s Law was speci?c about the priests’ duties
and the way that they were to o?er sacri?ces at his
tabernacle. For good reason! Those sacri?ces represented God’s provisions to forgive sins so that people could be clean in his eyes, eligible for his blessing and guidance. But Hophni and Phinehas led
their fellow priests to treat the o?erings with great
disrespect.1
13 Imagine young Samuel watching, wide-eyed,
1 The account provides two examples of disrespect. For one thing,
the Law speci?ed which pieces of a sacri?cial o?ering were to go
to the priests to eat. (Deut. 18:3) But at the tabernacle, the wicked
priests had set up a very di?erent practice. They would have their
attendants simply jab a great fork into the cauldron where the
meat was boiling, taking whatever choice morsel came out! For another thing, when people brought their sacri?ces to be burned at
the altar, the wicked priests would have an attendant bully the offerer, demanding the raw meat even before the fat of the sacri?ce
was o?ered to Jehovah.—Lev. 3:3-5; 1 Sam. 2:13-17.

13, 14. (a) How were sincere people no doubt a?ected by the wickedness at the tabernacle? (b) How did Eli fail, both as a father and as
high priest?
HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

109

as such gross abuses went on uncorrected. How
many people did he see—including poor, humble,
downtrodden folk—approaching that sacred tabernacle in hopes of ?nding some spiritual comfort and
strength, only to leave disappointed, hurt, or humiliated? And how did he feel when he learned that
Hophni and Phinehas also disregarded Jehovah’s
laws on sexual morality, as they had relations with
some of the women who were serving there at the
tabernacle? (1 Sam. 2:22) Perhaps he looked hopefully to Eli to do something about it.
14 Eli was in the best position to address the growing disaster. As high priest, he was responsible for
what took place at the tabernacle. As a father, he
had an obligation to correct his sons. After all, they
were hurting themselves as well as countless others
in the land. However, Eli failed on both counts, as
a father and as high priest. He o?ered his sons only
a bland, weak scolding. (Read 1 Samuel 2:23-25.) But
his sons needed far stronger discipline. They were
committing sins worthy of death!
15 Matters reached such a point that Jehovah sent
15. Jehovah sent what strong message to Eli, and how did Eli’s family respond to the warning?
110

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

“a man of God,” an unnamed prophet, to Eli with a
strong message of judgment. Jehovah told Eli: “You
keep honoring your sons more than me.” God thus
foretold that Eli’s wicked sons would die on the
same day and that Eli’s family would su?er greatly,
even losing its privileged position in the priestly class. Did this powerful warning bring about a
change in that family? The record reveals no such
change of heart.—1 Sam. 2:27–3:1.
16

How did all this corruption a?ect young Samu-

el? From time to time in this dark account, we
?nd bright rays of light, good news about Samuel’s
growth and progress. Recall that at 1 Samuel 2:18,
we read that Samuel was faithfully “ministering before Jehovah, as a boy.” Even at that early age, Samuel centered his life on his service to God. In
verse 21 of the same chapter, we read something
even more heartwarming: “The boy Samuel continued growing up with Jehovah.” As he grew, his bond
with his heavenly Father got stronger. Such a close
16. (a) What reports do we read regarding young Samuel’s progress?
(b) Do you ?nd those reports heartwarming? Explain.
HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

111

personal relationship with Jehovah is the surest protection against any form of corruption.
17

It would have been easy for Samuel to reason

that if the high priest and his sons can give in to
sin, he might as well do whatever he wished. But
the corruption of others, including those in positions of authority, is never an excuse to sin. Today,
many Christian youths follow Samuel’s example and
keep “growing up with Jehovah”—even when some
around them fail to set a good example.
18

How did such a course work out for Samuel? We

read: “All the while the boy Samuel was growing bigger and more likable both from Jehovah’s standpoint and from that of men.” (1 Sam. 2:26) So Samuel was well-liked, at least by those whose opinions
mattered. Jehovah himself cherished this boy for his
faithful course. And Samuel surely knew that his
God would act against all the badness going on in
Shiloh, but perhaps he wondered when. One night,
such questions met an answer.
17, 18. (a) How might Christian youths imitate Samuel’s example
when faced with corruption? (b) What shows that Samuel chose the
right course?
112

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

19

“Speak, for Your S ervant Is Listening”
It was nearing morning but still dark; the ?ick-

ering light of the tent’s great lamp was still burning.
In the stillness, Samuel heard a voice calling his
name. He thought it was Eli, who was now very old
and nearly blind. Samuel got up and “went running”
to the old man. Can you see the boy in your mind’s
eye, hurrying barefoot to see what Eli needed? It is
touching to note that Samuel treated Eli with respect and kindness. In spite of all his sins, Eli was
still Jehovah’s high priest.—1 Sam. 3:2-5.
20

Samuel woke Eli, saying: “Here I am, for you

called me.” But Eli said that he had not called and
sent the boy back to bed. Well, the same thing happened again and then again! Finally, Eli realized
what was going on. It had become rare for Jehovah
to send a vision or a prophetic message to his people, and it is not hard to see why. But Eli knew that
Jehovah was speaking again—now to this boy! Eli
told Samuel to go back to bed and instructed him
19, 20. (a) Describe what happened to Samuel late one night at the tabernacle. (b) How did Samuel learn the source of the message, and how
did he treat Eli?
HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

113

on how to answer properly. Samuel obeyed. Soon he
heard the voice calling: “Samuel, Samuel!” The boy
answered: “Speak, for your servant is listening.”
—1 Sam. 3:1, 5-10.
21

Jehovah did, at last, have a servant in Shiloh

who was listening. That became Samuel’s life pattern. Is it yours? We do not have to wait for a supernatural voice in the night to speak to us. Today,
God’s voice is always there for us in a sense. It is
there in his completed Word, the Bible. The more
we listen to God and respond, the more our faith
will grow. So it was with Samuel.
22

That night in Shiloh was a milestone in Samu-

el’s life, for then he began to know Jehovah in a special sense, becoming God’s own prophet and spokesman. At ?rst, the boy was afraid to deliver Jehovah’s
message to Eli, for it was a ?nal pronouncement that
the prophecy against that family was soon to come
true. But Samuel mustered the courage—and Eli
21. How can we listen to Jehovah today, and why is it worthwhile to
do so?
22, 23. (a) How did the message that Samuel at ?rst feared to deliver
come true? (b) How did Samuel’s reputation continue to grow?
114

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

humbly acquiesced to the divine judgment. Before
long, everything Jehovah had said was ful?lled: Israel went to war with the Philistines, Hophni and
Phinehas were both killed on the same day, and Eli
himself died on learning that Jehovah’s sacred Ark
had been captured.—1 Sam. 3:10-18; 4:1-18.
However, Samuel’s reputation as a faithful
prophet only grew. “Jehovah himself proved to be
with him,” the account says, adding that Jehovah let
none of Samuel’s prophecies fail.—Read 1 Samuel
3:19.
23

24

“S amuel Called to Jehovah”
Did the Israelites follow Samuel’s lead and be-

come spiritual, faithful people? No. In time, they decided that they did not want a mere prophet to judge
them. They wanted to be like other nations and
have a human king rule over them. At Jehovah’s direction, Samuel complied. But he had to convey to
Israel the magnitude of their sin. They were rejecting, not a mere man, but Jehovah himself! So he
summoned the people to Gilgal.
24. In time, what decision did the Israelites make, and why was that a
serious sin?
HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

115

25

Let us rejoin him in that tense moment of

addressing Israel at Gilgal. There, elderly Samuel reminded Israel of his faithful record of integrity. Then, we read: “Samuel called to Jehovah.”
He asked Jehovah for a thunderstorm.—1 Sam. 12:
17, 18.
26

A thunderstorm? In the dry season? Why, such

a thing was unheard of! If there was even a trace of
skepticism or sco?ng among the people, it did not
last long. The sky suddenly darkened with clouds.
The winds battered the wheat in the ?elds. The
thunder let out its booming, deafening roars. And
the rain fell. The response? “The people were greatly in fear of Jehovah and of Samuel.” At last, they
saw how seriously they had sinned.—1 Sam. 12:
18, 19.
27

Not Samuel, but his God, Jehovah, had reached

their rebellious hearts. From his youth to his old
age, Samuel put faith in his God. And Jehovah re25, 26. At Gilgal, how did elderly Samuel ?nally help his people to see
the seriousness of their sin against Jehovah?
27. How does Jehovah feel about those who imitate the faith of Samuel?
116

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

warded him. To this day, Jehovah has not changed.
He still supports those who imitate the faith of
Samuel.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? What helped Samuel’s faith to grow during his
youth?
? How did Samuel’s faith enable him to resist
bad in?uences?
? How did Samuel’s faith help him to overcome
fear?
? What are some ways that you would like to
imitate the faith of Samuel?

HE “CONTINUED GROWING UP WITH JEHOVAH”

117

CHAPTER EIGHT

He Endured Despite Disappointments
SAMUEL could feel the grief in Shiloh. It almost
seemed that the town was awash in tears. From how
many houses did the cries of women and children
emanate, the sounds of grieving over the news about
fathers, husbands, sons, and brothers who would not
be coming home? We know only that Israel had lost
some 30,000 soldiers in a terrible defeat at the hands
of the Philistines not long after the loss of 4,000 in
another battle.—1 Sam. 4:1, 2, 10.
That was just part of a string of tragedies. High
Priest Eli’s two wicked sons, Hophni and Phinehas,
had marched out of Shiloh with the sacred ark of the
covenant. Usually housed in the holy compartment
of the tabernacle—a tentlike temple—this precious
chest was a symbol of God’s presence. The people
then took the Ark into battle, foolishly thinking that
it would act as a talisman and give them victory. But
2

1. Why was Shiloh full of grief and mourning?
2, 3. What string of tragedies had brought shame and loss of glory to
Shiloh?
118

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

the Philistines captured the Ark, killing Hophni and
Phinehas.—1 Sam. 4:3-11.
3

The tabernacle in Shiloh had been honored with

the presence of the Ark for centuries. Now it was
gone. Upon hearing this news, 98-year-old Eli fell
backward from his seat and died. His daughter-inlaw, widowed that very day, died in childbirth. Before expiring, she said: “Glory has gone away from
Israel into exile.” Indeed, Shiloh would never be the
same.—1 Sam. 4:12-22.
4

How would Samuel cope with these profound dis-

appointments? Would his faith stand up to the challenge of helping a people who had lost Jehovah’s
protection and favor? All of us today may, at times,
face hardships and disappointments that challenge
our faith, so let us see what more we can learn from
Samuel.
5

He “E?ected Righteousness”
The Bible record turns away from Samuel at this

point and follows the sacred Ark, showing us how
4. What will we discuss in this chapter?
5, 6. What does the Bible record focus on regarding a 20-year period,
and how was Samuel occupied during that time?
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

119

the Philistines su?ered for taking it and were forced
to return it. When we again come upon Samuel,
some 20 years have passed. (1 Sam. 7:2) How was he
occupied during those years? We need not guess.
6

We learn that before this period began, “the word

of Samuel continued to come to all Israel.” (1 Sam.
4:1) The record reveals that after the period was
over, Samuel made a custom of visiting three cities
in Israel, making a circuit each year, handling disputes and resolving questions. Then he would return
to his hometown of Ramah. (1 Sam. 7:15-17) Clearly, Samuel always kept busy, and during that 20-year
interval, he had much to do.
7

The immorality and corruption of Eli’s sons had

eroded the people’s faith. Many, it seems, turned to
idolatry as a result. After two decades of hard work,
though, Samuel delivered this message to the people: “If it is with all your heart you are returning to
Jehovah, put away the foreign gods from your midst
and also the Ashtoreth images, and direct your heart
7, 8. (a) What message did Samuel deliver to the people after two decades of hard work? (b) How did the people respond to Samuel’s
assurance?
120

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

unswervingly to Jehovah and serve him alone, and
he will deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.”
—1 Sam. 7:3.
8

“The hand of the Philistines” had grown heavy on

the people. With Israel’s army e?ectively smashed,
the Philistines felt that they could oppress God’s
people with impunity. But Samuel assured the people that things would change if only they returned to
Jehovah. Were they willing? To Samuel’s delight,
they put away their idols and “began serving Jehovah alone.” Samuel convened an assembly at Mizpah, a town in the mountainous country north of Jerusalem. The people gathered, fasted, and repented
for their many sins of idolatry.—Read 1 Samuel 7:4-6.
9

However, the Philistines learned of this great

gathering and saw an opportunity. They sent their
army to Mizpah to crush those worshippers of Jehovah. The Israelites heard news of the approaching
danger. Terri?ed, they asked Samuel to pray for
them. He did so, o?ering a sacri?ce as well. During that sacred ceremony, the Philistine army came
9. The Philistines saw what opportunity, and how did God’s people respond to the danger?
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

121

up against Mizpah. Jehovah then answered Samuel’s
prayer. In e?ect, Jehovah let out a roar of indignation. He “caused it to thunder with a loud noise on
that day against the Philistines.”—1 Sam. 7:7-10.
Now, should we imagine that those Philistines
were like little children who scurry in fear to hide
behind their mothers when they hear a thunderclap?
No, these were tough, battle-hardened soldiers. This
thunder, then, must have been unlike anything they
knew. Was it the sheer volume of this “loud noise”?
Did it come out of a clear blue sky, or did it echo
ba?ingly from the hillsides? At any rate, it shook
those Philistines to the core. In utter confusion, they
changed quickly from bullies to targets. The men of
Israel poured forth from Mizpah, defeated them, and
chased them for miles, to a place southwest of Jerusalem.—1 Sam. 7:11.
10

That battle was a turning point. The Philistines
kept retreating during the rest of Samuel’s days as
judge. City after city returned to the control of
God’s people.—1 Sam. 7:13, 14.
11

10, 11. (a) Why must there have been something unusual about the
thunder that Jehovah directed against the Philistine army? (b) What
resulted from the battle that began at Mizpah?
122

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

12

Many centuries later, the apostle Paul listed

Samuel among the faithful judges and prophets who
“e?ected righteousness.” (Heb. 11:32, 33) Samuel did
indeed help to bring about what was good and right
in God’s eyes. He remained e?ective because he waited patiently on Jehovah, faithfully keeping at his
work in spite of disappointments. He also showed an
appreciative spirit. After the victory at Mizpah, Samuel had a monument erected to commemorate the
way that Jehovah had helped his people.—1 Sam.
7:12.
13

Do you want to ‘e?ect righteousness’? If so, you

do well to learn from Samuel’s patience and his humble, appreciative spirit. (Read 1 Peter 5:6.) Who of us
does not need those qualities? It was good for Samuel to acquire and display such traits when relatively young, for he faced deeper disappointments in his
later years.
12. What does it mean that Samuel “e?ected righteousness,” and what
qualities helped him to remain e?ective?
13. (a) What qualities do we need if we are to imitate Samuel?
(b) When do you think is a good time to develop traits like those of
Samuel?
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

123

“Your Own S ons Have Not Walked in Your Ways”
14 The next time we see Samuel, he “had grown
old.” Samuel had two adult sons by this time, Joel
and Abijah, and he entrusted them with the responsibility of helping him in the work of judging. Sadly, though, his trust was misplaced. Honest and
righteous though Samuel was, his sons used their positions for sel?sh ends, perverting justice and taking
bribes.—1 Sam. 8:1-3.
15 One day, the older men of Israel approached the
elderly prophet to complain. “Your own sons have
not walked in your ways,” they said. (1 Sam. 8:4, 5)
Was Samuel aware of the problem? The account does
not say. Unlike Eli, however, Samuel was surely
not a reprehensible father. Jehovah had rebuked
and punished Eli for failing to correct his sons’
wickedness, for honoring his sons more than God.
(1 Sam. 2:27-29) Jehovah never found such fault with
Samuel.
16 The account does not reveal Samuel’s agonizing
14, 15. (a) What severe disappointment did Samuel face after he “had
grown old”? (b) Was Samuel a reprehensible father in the manner of
Eli? Explain.
16. What feelings a?ict parents of rebellious children, and how might
parents ?nd a measure of comfort and guidance in Samuel’s example?
124

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

shame, anxiety, or disappointment once he learned
of his sons’ wicked conduct. Many parents, however,
can imagine his feelings only too well. In today’s
dark times, rebellion against parental authority and
discipline is pandemic. (Read 2 Timothy 3:1-5.) Parents who are dealing with that kind of pain may ?nd
a measure of comfort and guidance in Samuel’s example. He did not let his sons’ faithless ways alter
his own course one bit. Remember, even after words
and discipline fail to reach hardened hearts, parental example remains a powerful teacher. And parents
always have the opportunity to make their own Father, Jehovah God, proud—as did Samuel.
17

“Do Appoint for Us a King”
Samuel’s sons could not have imagined how far

the e?ects of their greed and sel?shness would reach.
The older men of Israel went on to say to Samuel:
“Now do appoint for us a king to judge us like all
the nations.” Did that demand feel like a rejection to
Samuel? After all, he had been judging those people
on Jehovah’s behalf for decades. Now they wanted,
17. What did the older men of Israel demand of Samuel, and how did
he react?
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

125

not some mere prophet like Samuel, but a king to be
their judge. The nations round about had kings, and
the Israelites wanted one too! How did Samuel react?
We read that “the thing was bad in the eyes of Samuel.”—1 Sam. 8:5, 6.
18

Note how Jehovah responded when Samuel took

the matter to him in prayer: “Listen to the voice of
the people as respects all that they say to you; for it
is not you whom they have rejected, but it is I whom
they have rejected from being king over them.” How
comforting for Samuel, yet how awful an insult those
people had ?ung at Almighty God! Jehovah told his
prophet to warn the Israelites of the high price they
would pay for having a human king. When Samuel
complied, they insisted: “No, but a king is what will
come to be over us.” Ever obedient to his God, Samuel went and anointed the king whom Jehovah chose.
—1 Sam. 8:7-19.
19

How, though, did Samuel obey? In a resentful,

18. How did Jehovah comfort Samuel and yet reveal the seriousness of
Israel’s sin?
19, 20. (a) In what ways did Samuel obey Jehovah’s direction to anoint
Saul as king of Israel? (b) How did Samuel continue to help Jehovah’s
people?
126

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

perfunctory way? Did he allow disappointment to
poison his heart, letting bitterness take root? Many
a man might respond that way in such a situation,
but not Samuel. He anointed Saul and acknowledged
that the man was Jehovah’s own choice. He kissed
Saul, a sign of welcome and submission to the new
king. And he said to the people: “Have you seen the
one whom Jehovah has chosen, that there is none
like him among all the people?”—1 Sam. 10:1, 24.
20

Samuel focused, not on faults, but on the good

in the man whom Jehovah had chosen. As for himself, he focused on his own record of integrity to
God rather than on the approval of ?ckle people.
(1 Sam. 12:1-4) He also worked faithfully at his own
assignment, counseling God’s people about the spiritual dangers they faced and encouraging them to remain faithful to Jehovah. His counsel reached their
hearts, and the people begged Samuel to pray in
their behalf. He gave them this beautiful reply: “It
is unthinkable, on my part, to sin against Jehovah by
ceasing to pray in your behalf; and I must instruct
you in the good and right way.”—1 Sam. 12:21-24.
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

127

Have you ever felt disappointed when someone
else was chosen for a certain position or privilege?
Samuel’s example is a powerful reminder that we
21

must never let jealousy or bitterness take root in our
heart. (Read Proverbs 14:30.) God has plenty of rewarding, ful?lling work for each of his faithful servants.
“For How Long Will You B e Mourning for S aul?”
22 Samuel was right to see good in Saul; this was a
remarkable man. Tall and impressive in appearance,
he was courageous and resourceful yet initially modest and unassuming. (1 Sam. 10:22, 23, 27) In addition to such gifts, he had a precious one—free will,
the ability to choose his life course and make his
own decisions. (Deut. 30:19) Did he use that gift
well?
Sadly, when a man basks in the warm glow of
newly acquired power, modesty is often the ?rst
23

quality to melt away. Before long, Saul began to turn
21. How might Samuel’s example prove helpful if you ever feel disappointed when someone else receives a position or privilege?
22. Why was Samuel right to see good in Saul initially?
23. What precious quality did Saul lose ?rst, and how did he show his
growing arrogance?
128

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

arrogant. He chose to disobey Jehovah’s orders that
Samuel transmitted to him. Once, Saul grew impatient and o?ered up a sacri?ce that Samuel intended to o?er. Samuel had to give him strong correction and foretold that the kingship would not remain
in Saul’s family. Instead of being chastened by the
discipline, Saul went on to commit worse acts of disobedience.—1 Sam. 13:8, 9, 13, 14.
24

Through Samuel, Jehovah told Saul to wage war

against the Amalekites. Jehovah’s instructions included an order to execute their wicked king, Agag.
However, Saul spared Agag as well as the best of the
spoil, which was to be destroyed. When Samuel came
to correct him, Saul revealed how much he had
changed. Instead of modestly accepting correction,
he rationalized, excused himself, justi?ed his actions,
sidestepped the issue, and tried to shift the blame to
the people. When Saul tried to de?ect the discipline by claiming that some of the spoil was intended for a sacri?ce to Jehovah, Samuel uttered the
24. (a) How did Saul disobey Jehovah in the war against the Amalekites? (b) How did Saul respond to correction, and what was Jehovah’s
decision?
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

129

famous words: “Look! To obey is better than a sacri?ce.” Courageously, Samuel rebuked the man and revealed Jehovah’s decision: The kingship would be
ripped away from Saul and given to another—a better man.1—1 Sam. 15:1-33.
25

Samuel was deeply upset over Saul’s failings. He

spent the night crying out to Jehovah about the matter. He even went into mourning for the man. Samuel had seen so much potential in Saul, so much
good, and now such hopes were shattered. The man
he once knew had changed—he had lost his best
qualities and turned against Jehovah. Samuel refused to see Saul ever again. In time, though, Jehovah o?ered Samuel this gentle reproof: “For how
long will you be mourning for Saul, while I, on the
other hand, have rejected him from ruling as king
over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I shall
1 Samuel himself executed Agag. Neither that wicked king nor his
family deserved leniency. Centuries later, Agag’s descendants evidently included “Haman the Agagite,” who attempted to wipe out
all of God’s people.—Esther 8:3; see Chapters 15 and 16 of this
publication.

25, 26. (a) Why did Samuel mourn for Saul, and how did Jehovah gently reprove His prophet? (b) What lesson did Samuel learn when he went
to the house of Jesse?
130

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, because I have
provided among his sons a king for myself.”—1 Sam.
15:34, 35; 16:1.
26

Jehovah’s purpose does not depend on the wa-

vering loyalties of imperfect humans. If one man
turns unfaithful, Jehovah will ?nd another to carry
out His will. So aged Samuel let go of his grief over
Saul. At Jehovah’s direction, Samuel went to the
home of Jesse in Bethlehem, where he met a number of Jesse’s impressive-looking sons. Yet, from the
?rst, Jehovah reminded Samuel to look beyond mere
physical attributes. (Read 1 Samuel 16:7.) Finally,
Samuel met the youngest son, and here was Jehovah’s choice—David!
27

In his ?nal years, Samuel got to see ever more

clearly the rightness of Jehovah’s decision to replace
Saul with David. Saul descended into murderous
jealousy and apostasy. David, however, showed beautiful qualities—courage, integrity, faith, and loyalty.
As Samuel’s life drew to a close, his faith grew ever
stronger. He saw that no disappointment is too great
27. (a) What helped Samuel’s faith to keep growing stronger? (b) How
do you feel about the example that Samuel set?
HE ENDURED DESPITE DISAPPOINTMENTS

131

for Jehovah to heal, to resolve, or even to turn into
a blessing. Finally, Samuel died, leaving behind the
record of a remarkable life that spanned the better
part of a century. All of Israel mourned the loss of
that faithful man—and no wonder! To this day, servants of Jehovah do well to ask, ‘Will I imitate the
faith of Samuel?’

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Samuel cope with the tragedies that
befell Shiloh?
? What enabled Samuel to endure despite the
rebellion of his sons?
? How did Samuel recover from
disappointments regarding King Saul?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the
faith of Samuel?

132

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  SAMUEL

CHAPTER NINE

She Acted With Discretion
ABIGAIL saw the panic in the young man’s eyes. He
was terri?ed—and for good reason. Grave danger
loomed. Right at that moment, some 400 warriors
were on the way, determined to kill o? every male
in the household of Nabal, Abigail’s husband. Why?
2

It had all started with Nabal. He had acted cruel-

ly and insolently, as usual. This time, though, he
had insulted the wrong man—the beloved commander of a loyal and well-trained band of warriors.
Now, one of Nabal’s young workmen, perhaps a
shepherd, came to Abigail, trusting that she would
come up with a plan to save them. But what could
one woman do against an army?
3

First, let us learn a little more about this remark-

able woman. Who was Abigail? How had this crisis
arisen? And what can we learn from her example of
faith?
1-3. (a) How did danger come to loom over Abigail’s household?
(b) What will we learn about this remarkable woman?
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

133

4

“Good in Discretion and
B eautiful in Form”
Abigail and Nabal were not a good match. Na-

bal could hardly have chosen a better spouse, whereas Abigail found herself married to one who could
hardly have been worse. Granted, the man had money. He thus saw himself as very important, but how
did others view him? It would be di?cult to ?nd a
Bible character who is spoken of in more contemptuous terms. His very name means “Senseless,” or
“Stupid.” Did his parents give him such a name at
birth, or was it an epithet that stuck to him later? In either case, he lived up to his name. Nabal was “harsh and bad in his practices.” A bully
and a drunkard, he was widely feared and disliked.
—1 Sam. 25:2, 3, 17, 21, 25.
5

Abigail was altogether di?erent from Nabal. Her

name means “My Father Has Made Himself Joyful.”
Many a father is proud to have a beautiful daughter, but a wise father is far happier to discern inner
4. What kind of man was Nabal?
5, 6. (a) What do you think were Abigail’s most appealing qualities?
(b) Why might Abigail have married such a good-for-nothing man?
134

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

beauty in his child. All too often, a person blessed
with outward beauty fails to see the need to develop such qualities as discretion, wisdom, courage, or
faith. Not so with Abigail. The Bible praises her
for her discretion as well as for her beauty.—Read
1 Samuel 25:3.
6

Some today might wonder why such an intelli-

gent young woman married such a good-for-nothing
man. Remember, many marriages in Bible times
were arranged. If not, parental consent was still of
great importance. Did Abigail’s parents favor this
marriage, even arrange it, because they were impressed with Nabal’s wealth and prominence? Did
they feel pressured by poverty? At any rate, Nabal’s
money did not make him a ?t husband.
7

Wise parents carefully teach their children a

wholesome view of marriage. They neither urge
their children to marry for money nor pressure
them to begin dating when still too young to take
on adult roles and responsibilities. (1 Cor. 7:36)
7. (a) What should parents today avoid if they want to teach their children a wholesome view of marriage? (b) What was Abigail determined
to do?
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

135

However, it was too late for Abigail to think about
such things. For whatever reason, she was married
to Nabal, and she was determined to make the best
of a di?cult situation.
8

“He S creamed Rebukes at Them”
Nabal had just made Abigail’s situation harder

than ever. The man he had insulted was none other
than David. This was the faithful servant of Jehovah whom Samuel the prophet had anointed, revealing David as God’s choice to succeed Saul as king.
(1 Sam. 16:1, 2, 11-13) On the run from the jealous
and murderous King Saul, David was dwelling in the
wilderness with his 600 loyal warriors.
9

Nabal lived in Maon but worked and likely

owned land in nearby Carmel.1 Those towns lay
amidst grassy uplands suitable for raising sheep, of
1 This was not the famous Mount Carmel far to the north where
the prophet Elijah later had a showdown with the prophets of Baal.
(See Chapter 10.) This Carmel was a town at the edge of the southern wilderness.

8. Whom had Nabal insulted, and why would you say that this was most
unwise?
9, 10. (a) David and his men were struggling to survive in what setting? (b) Why should Nabal have appreciated what David and his men
had been doing? (See also paragraph 10 footnote.)
136

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

which Nabal owned 3,000. All around, though, was
wild country. To the south lay the vast wilderness
of Paran. To the east, the approach to the Salt Sea
led through desolate wastelands riddled with ravines
and caves. In these regions David and his men struggled to survive, no doubt hunting for their food and
enduring many hardships. They often encountered
the young men who worked as shepherds for the
wealthy Nabal.
10

How did those hardworking soldiers treat the

shepherds? It would have been easy for them to help
themselves to a sheep now and then, but they did
nothing of the kind. On the contrary, they were like
a protective wall around Nabal’s ?ocks and servants.
(Read 1 Samuel 25:15, 16.) Sheep and shepherds
faced plenty of dangers. Predators abounded, and Israel’s southern border was so close that bands of
foreign marauders and thieves frequently attacked.1
1 David likely felt that protecting the local landowners and their
?ocks was a service to Jehovah God. In those days, it was Jehovah’s purpose for the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to
dwell in that land. Protecting it from foreign invaders and marauding bands was thus a form of sacred service.
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

137

It must have been quite an undertaking to keep
all those men fed in the wilderness. So one day David sent ten messengers to Nabal to ask for help. David chose the moment wisely. It was the festive time
of sheepshearing, when generosity and feasting were
customary. David also chose his words with care, using polite terms and forms of address. He even referred to himself as “your son David,” perhaps a respectful acknowledgment of Nabal’s greater age.
How did Nabal respond?—1 Sam. 25:5-8.
12 He was outraged! “He screamed rebukes at
them” is how the young man mentioned at the outset described the scene to Abigail. Miserly Nabal
complained loudly about his precious bread, water,
and slaughtered meat. He ridiculed David as inconsequential and compared him to a runaway servant.
Nabal’s view may have been similar to that of Saul,
who hated David. Neither man had Jehovah’s view.
God loved David and saw him, not as a rebellious
slave, but as the future king of Israel.—1 Sam. 25:
10, 11, 14.
11

11, 12. (a) How did David show tact and respect in his message to Nabal? (b) What was wrong with the way Nabal responded to David’s
message?
138

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

When the emissaries reported back to David, he
became furious. “Gird on every one his sword!” he
commanded. Arming himself, David led 400 of his
men to attack. He vowed to wipe out every male in
Nabal’s household. (1 Sam. 25:12, 13, 21, 22) David’s
ire was understandable, but his way of expressing it
was wrong. The Bible says: “Man’s wrath does not
work out God’s righteousness.” (Jas. 1:20) How,
though, could Abigail save her household?
13

“Blessed B e Your S ensibleness”
14 In a way, we have already seen Abigail take the
?rst step toward righting this terrible wrong. Unlike
her husband, Nabal, she proved willing to listen. As
for bringing the matter to Nabal, the young servant
said of him: “He is too much of a good-for-nothing
fellow to speak to him.”1 (1 Sam. 25:17) Tragically,
1 The phrase the young man used literally means “a son of belial
(worthlessness).” Other Bible renderings of this sentence include a
description of Nabal as a man “who won’t listen to anyone” and
the conclusion, “it is no good talking to him.”

13. (a) How did David initially respond to Nabal’s insult? (b) What
light does the principle recorded at James 1:20 shed on David’s reaction?
14. (a) In what way did Abigail take the ?rst step toward righting the
wrong that Nabal had committed? (b) What practical lesson might we
learn from the contrast between Nabal and Abigail? (See also footnote.)
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

139

Nabal’s view of his own importance rendered him
unwilling to listen. Such arrogance is all too common even to this day. But the young man knew Abigail to be di?erent, which is no doubt why he approached her with this problem.
15

Abigail thought and acted quickly. “At once Ab-

igail hastened,” we read. Four times in this one account we ?nd the same verb, “to hasten,” used regarding this woman. She prepared a generous gift
for David and his men. It included bread, wine,
sheep, roasted grain, cakes of raisins, and cakes of
?gs. Clearly, Abigail knew well what she had and
was thoroughly in charge of her household responsibilities, much like the capable wife later described
in the book of Proverbs. (Prov. 31:10-31) She sent
the provisions ahead with some of her servants, then
followed alone. “But,” we read, “to her husband Nabal she told nothing.”—1 Sam. 25:18, 19.
16

Does this mean that Abigail was rebelling

against her husband’s rightful headship? No; keep in
15, 16. (a) How did Abigail show that she was like the capable wife described in the book of Proverbs? (b) Why was Abigail’s course not a
case of rebelling against her husband’s rightful headship?
140

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

mind that Nabal had acted wickedly against an
anointed servant of Jehovah, an action that could
well result in death for many innocent members of
Nabal’s household. If Abigail failed to act, might
she become a sharer in her husband’s guilt? In this
case, she had to put submission to her God ahead
of submission to her husband.
17

Before long, Abigail met up with David and

his men. Again she hastened, this time to descend
from her donkey and humble herself before David.
(1 Sam. 25:20, 23) Then she poured out her heart at
length, making a powerful plea for mercy in behalf
of her husband and her household. What made her
words e?ective?
18

She took responsibility for the problem and

asked David to forgive her personally. She realistically acknowledged that her husband was as senseless as his name implied, perhaps suggesting that it
would be beneath David’s dignity to chastise such a
man. She expressed her trust in David as Jehovah’s
17, 18. How did Abigail approach David, what did she say, and what
made her words e?ective?
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

141

representative, recognizing that he was ?ghting “the
wars of Jehovah.” She also indicated that she knew
of Jehovah’s promise regarding David and the kingship, for she said: “Jehovah . . . certainly will commission you as leader over Israel.” Further, she
urged David not to take any action that might bring
bloodguilt upon him or that might later become “a
cause for staggering”—evidently referring to a troubled conscience. (Read 1 Samuel 25:24-31.) Kind,
moving words!
And how did David respond? He accepted what
Abigail had brought and said: “Blessed be Jehovah
the God of Israel, who has sent you this day to meet
19

me! And blessed be your sensibleness, and blessed
be you who have restrained me this day from entering into bloodguilt.” David praised her for bravely
hastening to meet him, and he acknowledged that
she had restrained him from incurring bloodguilt.
“Go up in peace to your house,” he told her, and
he humbly added: “I have listened to your voice.”
—1 Sam. 25:32-35.
19. How did David respond to Abigail’s words, and why did he praise
her?
142

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

20

“Here Is Your Slave Girl”
After she took her leave, Abigail could not help

thinking about that meeting; nor could she have
failed to notice the contrast between that faithful,
kind man and the brute to whom she was married.
But she did not dwell on such thoughts. We read:
“Later Abigail came in to Nabal.” Yes, she returned
to her husband as determined as ever to carry out
her role as his wife to the best of her ability. She
had to tell him of the gift she had given to David
and his men. He had a right to know. She also had
to tell him—before he learned of it elsewhere, to his
even greater shame—about the danger that had
been averted. She could not tell him now though.
He was feasting like a king and was as drunk as
could be.—1 Sam. 25:36.
21

Again showing both courage and discretion, she

waited until the next morning when the in?uence of
the wine had ebbed. He would be sober enough to
understand her, yet possibly more dangerous in his
20, 21. (a) What do you ?nd admirable about Abigail’s willingness to
return to her husband? (b) How did Abigail show courage and discretion in choosing the time to talk to Nabal?
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

143

temper as well. Still, she approached and told him
the whole story. No doubt she expected him to explode in fury, perhaps violence. Instead, he just sat
there, not moving.—1 Sam. 25:37.
What was wrong with the man? “His heart came
to be dead inside him, and he himself became as a
stone.” Perhaps he had su?ered some form of stroke.
However, about ten days later, his end came—and
not strictly for medical reasons. The account tells
us: “Jehovah struck Nabal, so that he died.” (1 Sam.
25:38) With that righteous execution, Abigail’s long
nightmare of a marriage was over. While Jehovah
does not step in with miraculous executions today,
this account is a ?tting reminder that no case of domestic tyranny or abuse escapes his notice. In his
own time, he will always bring about justice.—Read
Luke 8:17.
22

Besides the release from a bad marriage, Abigail
had another blessing in store. When he learned of
the death of Nabal, David sent messengers to pro23

22. What happened to Nabal, and what can we learn about all cases of
domestic tyranny or abuse?
23. What further blessing came to Abigail, and how did she show that
her new prospects did not change her?
144

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

pose marriage. “Here is your slave girl,” she responded, “as a maidservant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.” Clearly, she was not changed
by the prospect of becoming David’s wife; she even
o?ered to be a servant to his servants! Then we read
again of her hastening, this time to ready herself to
go to David.—1 Sam. 25:39-42.
This was no fairy-tale ending; Abigail’s life with
David would not always be easy. David was already
married to Ahinoam, and though God permitted
polygamy, it surely presented special challenges to
faithful women back then. And David was not yet
king; there would be obstacles and hardships to sur24

mount before he served Jehovah in that way. But as
Abigail helped and supported David along life’s
road, eventually bearing him a son, she learned that
she had a husband who valued her and protected
her. On one occasion he even rescued her from kidnappers! (1 Sam. 30:1-19) David thus imitated Jehovah God, who loves and values such discreet, courageous, and faithful women.
24. Abigail faced what challenges in her new life, but how did her husband and her God view her?
SHE ACTED WITH DISCRETION

145

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? What can we learn from Abigail’s di?cult
marital situation?
? How did Abigail show courage and discretion
in dealing with her husband’s insult of David?
? How did Abigail speak sensibly and
persuasively to David?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Abigail?

146

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ABIGAIL

CHAPTER TEN

He Stood Up for Pure Worship
ELIJAH looked out over the crowd as they trudged
up the slopes of Mount Carmel. Even in the dim
light of early morning, the poverty and want a?icting these people were plain to see. The drought,
three and a half years long, had left its mark on
them.
2 Among them strutted the 450 prophets of Baal,
full of pride and burning hatred for Elijah, Jehovah’s
prophet. Queen Jezebel had executed many servants
of Jehovah, but this man still stood ?rm against Baal
worship. Ah, but for how long? Perhaps those priests
reasoned that a lone man could never prevail against
all of them. (1 Ki. 18:4, 19, 20) King Ahab had also
come, riding in his royal chariot. He too bore no love
for Elijah.
3 Ahead of that solitary prophet lay a day like
no other in his life. As Elijah watched, the
1, 2. (a) In what way were Elijah’s people a?icted? (b) Elijah faced
what opposition on Mount Carmel?
3, 4. (a) Why might Elijah have felt some fear as an important day
dawned? (b) What questions will we consider?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

147

stage was being set for one of the most dramatic confrontations between good and evil that the world has
ever seen. How did he feel as that day dawned? He
was not impervious to fear, being “a man with feelings like ours.” (Read James 5:17.) We can be sure, at
least, of this much: Surrounded by the faithless people, their apostate king, and those murderous priests,
Elijah keenly felt that he was all alone.—1 Ki. 18:22.
4

What, though, had brought Israel to this crisis?

And what does this account have to do with you?
Consider Elijah’s example of faith and how practical
it can be for us today.
A Long Struggle Reaches a Climax
5 For much of his life, Elijah had helplessly
watched as the best thing about his homeland and
his people was pushed aside and trampled underfoot.
You see, Israel was in the grip of a long struggle, a
war between pure religion and false, between the
worship of Jehovah God and the idolatry of the surrounding nations. In Elijah’s day, that struggle had
taken an especially ugly turn.
5, 6. (a) Israel was in the grip of what struggle? (b) How had King
Ahab deeply o?ended Jehovah?
148

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

King Ahab had deeply o?ended Jehovah. He married Jezebel, the daughter of the king of Sidon. Jezebel was determined to spread Baal worship in the
land of Israel and to eradicate the worship of Jehovah. Ahab quickly fell under her in?uence. He built
a temple and an altar to Baal and took the lead in
bowing down to this pagan god.—1 Ki. 16:30-33.
6

What made Baal worship so o?ensive? It seduced
Israel, luring many away from the true God. It was
also a disgusting and brutal religion. It involved
male and female temple prostitution, sexual orgies,
and even the sacri?ce of children. Jehovah responded by sending Elijah to Ahab to announce a drought
that would last until God’s prophet proclaimed its
end. (1 Ki. 17:1) Several years passed before Elijah
showed himself to Ahab and told him to gather the
people and the Baal prophets to Mount Carmel.1
7

What, though, does this struggle mean for us today? Some might assume that a story about Baal
8

1 See the box “How Long Was the Drought in Elijah’s Day?”

7. (a) What made Baal worship so o?ensive? (b) Regarding the length
of the drought in Elijah’s day, why may we be sure that the Bible contains no contradiction? (Include the box.)
8. What does this account about Baal worship mean for us today?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

149

worship is irrelevant now, since we do not see temples and altars to Baal around us. But this account
is not mere ancient history. (Rom. 15:4) The word
“Baal” means “owner” or “master.” Jehovah told his
people that they should choose him as their “baal,”
or husbandly owner. (Isa. 54:5) Would you not agree
that people still serve a variety of masters other than
God Almighty? Whether people use their life in the
service of money, career, recreation, sexual pleasure,
or any of the countless gods that are worshipped instead of Jehovah, they choose a master. (Matt. 6:24;
read Romans 6:16.) In a sense, the most potent elements that characterized Baal worship are thriving
today. Re?ecting on that ancient contest between Jehovah and Baal can help us make a wise choice
about whom we will serve.
9

“Limping”—How?
The heights of Mount Carmel commanded a

sweeping view—from the torrent valley of Kishon
below to the Great Sea (Mediterranean Sea) nearby
and to the mountains of Lebanon on the far north9. (a) How did the setting make Mount Carmel an ideal spot to expose
Baalism? (See also footnote.) (b) What did Elijah say to the people?
150

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

ern horizon.1 But as the sun rose on this climactic
day, the vista was grim. A deathly pall hung over the
once fertile land that Jehovah had given to the children of Abraham. It was now a land baked hard by
the merciless sun, ruined by the folly of God’s own
people! As those people thronged, Elijah approached
them and spoke: “How long will you be limping
upon two di?erent opinions? If Jehovah is the true
God, go following him; but if Baal is, go following
him.”—1 Ki. 18:21.
10

What did Elijah mean by the expression “limp-

ing upon two di?erent opinions”? Well, those people
did not realize that they had to choose between the
worship of Jehovah and the worship of Baal. They
thought that they could have it both ways—that
they could appease Baal with their revolting rituals and still ask favors of Jehovah God. Perhaps
1 Mount Carmel is usually lush and green, as moisture-laden
winds from the sea rise along its slopes, frequently depositing rains
and plentiful dew. Because Baal was credited with bringing rain,
this mount was evidently an important site for Baal worship. A barren, dry Carmel thus made an ideal spot to expose Baalism as a
fraud.

10. How were Elijah’s people “limping upon two di?erent opinions,”
and what basic truth had they forgotten?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

151

How Long Was the Drought in Elijah’s Day?
Jehovah’s prophet Elijah announced to King Ahab
that the long drought would end soon. That happened “in the third year”—evidently counting from
the day Elijah ?rst announced the drought. (1 Ki.
18:1) Jehovah sent rain soon after Elijah said that He
would. Some might conclude that the drought ended during the course of its third year and that it
was therefore less than three years long. However,
both Jesus and James tell us that the drought lasted
“three years and six months.” (Luke 4:25; Jas. 5:17) Is
this a contradiction?
Not at all. You see, the dry season in ancient Israel
was quite long, lasting up to six months. No doubt
Elijah came to Ahab to announce the drought when
the dry season was already proving to be unusually
long and severe. In e?ect, the drought had begun
nearly half a year earlier. Thus, when Elijah announced the end of the drought “in the third year”
from his previous announcement, the drought had
already lasted nearly three and a half years. The full
“three years and six months” had elapsed by the time
all the people assembled to witness the great test on
Mount Carmel.
152

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Consider, then, the timing of Elijah’s ?rst visit to
Ahab. The people believed that Baal was “the rider
of the clouds,” the god who would bring rains to end
the dry season. If the dry season was unusually long,
people likely wondered: ‘Where is Baal? When will
he bring the rains?’ Elijah’s announcement that neither rain nor dew would occur until he said so must
have been devastating to those Baal worshippers.
—1 Ki. 17:1.

they reasoned that Baal would bless their crops and
herds, while “Jehovah of armies” would protect them
in battle. (1 Sam. 17:45) They had forgotten a basic
truth—one that still eludes many today. Jehovah
does not share his worship with anyone. He demands
and is worthy of exclusive devotion. Any worship of
him that is mixed with some other form of worship
is unacceptable to him, even o?ensive!—Read Exodus
20:5.
11

So those Israelites were “limping” along like a

man trying to follow two pathways at once. Many
people today make a similar mistake, allowing other
11. How do you think that Elijah’s speech on Mount Carmel can help
us to reexamine our priorities and worship?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

153

“baals” to creep into their life and push aside the
worship of God. Heeding Elijah’s clarion call to stop
limping can help us to reexamine our own priorities
and worship.
12

A Climactic Test
Elijah next proposed a test. It was simplicity it-

self. The Baal priests were to set up an altar and lay
out a sacri?ce on it; then they were to pray to their
god to light the ?re. Elijah would do the same. He
said that the “God that answers by ?re is the true
God.” Elijah well knew who was the true God. So
strong was his faith that he did not hesitate to give
his opponents every advantage. He let those Baal
prophets go ?rst. So they chose their bull for sacri?ce and approached Baal.1—1 Ki. 18:24, 25.
13

We do not live in an age of miracles. However,

Jehovah has not changed. We can be just as con?dent in him as Elijah was. For instance, when others
1 Notably, Elijah told them: “You must not put ?re to” the sacri?ce. Some scholars say that such idolaters sometimes used altars
with a secret cavity beneath so that a ?re could appear to be lit
supernaturally.

12, 13. (a) What test did Elijah propose? (b) How might we show that
we are just as con?dent as Elijah was?
154

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

disagree with what the Bible teaches, we need not
fear to let them go ahead and have their say. Like
Elijah, we can look to the true God to settle the matter. We do that by relying, not on ourselves, but on
his inspired Word, which is designed “for setting
things straight.”—2 Tim. 3:16.
14

The Baal prophets proceeded to set up their sac-

ri?ce and call on their god. “O Baal, answer us!” they
cried again and again. They kept at it as the minutes
and then the hours passed by. “But there was no
voice, and there was no one answering,” the Bible
says. At noon Elijah began to mock them, asserting
sarcastically that Baal must be too busy to answer
them, that he was relieving himself in the privy, or
that he was napping and someone needed to wake
him up. “Call at the top of your voice,” Elijah urged
those charlatans. Clearly, he saw this Baal worship
as ridiculous fakery, and he wanted God’s people to
see it for the fraud that it was.—1 Ki. 18:26, 27.
15

In response, the Baal priests became even more

14. In what way did Elijah mock the Baal prophets, and why?
15. How does the case of the Baal priests show the folly of choosing
any master other than Jehovah?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

155

frenzied, “calling at the top of their voice and cutting themselves according to their custom with daggers and with lances, until they caused blood to ?ow
out upon them.” All to no avail! “There was no voice,
and there was no one answering, and there was no
paying of attention.” (1 Ki. 18:28, 29) Indeed, there
was no Baal. He was an invention designed by Satan
to lure people away from Jehovah. The truth is,
choosing any master other than Jehovah leads to disappointment, even shame.—Read Psalm 25:3; 115:4-8.
16

The Answer
Late in the afternoon came Elijah’s turn to o?er

a sacri?ce. He repaired an altar to Jehovah that had
been torn down, no doubt by enemies of pure worship. He used 12 stones, perhaps reminding many in
the 10-tribe nation of Israel that the Law given to all
12 tribes was still binding on them. Then he laid out
his sacri?ce and had everything doused with water,
possibly obtained from the Mediterranean Sea nearby. He even had a trench dug around the altar and
16. (a) Elijah’s repair of the altar to Jehovah on Mount Carmel may
have reminded the people of what? (b) How did Elijah further show his
con?dence in his God?
156

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

?lled it with water. Just as he had given the prophets of Baal every advantage, he gave Jehovah every
disadvantage—such was his con?dence in his God.
—1 Ki. 18:30-35.
17

When everything was ready, Elijah said a prayer.

Eloquent in its simplicity, the prayer showed clearly
where Elijah’s priorities lay. First and foremost, he
wanted it known that Jehovah, not this Baal, was
“God in Israel.” Second, he wanted everyone to
know that his own role was that of Jehovah’s servant; all glory and credit should go to God. Finally,
he showed that he still cared about his people, for
he was eager to see Jehovah turn “their heart back.”
(1 Ki. 18:36, 37) Despite all the misery that they had
caused by their faithlessness, Elijah still loved them.
In our own prayers to God, can we manifest similar
humility, concern for God’s name, and compassion
for others who need help?
18

Before Elijah’s prayer, the crowds there might

17. How did Elijah’s prayer reveal his priorities, and how can we imitate his example in our own prayers?
18, 19. (a) How did Jehovah answer Elijah’s prayer? (b) What did Elijah order the people to do, and why did the Baal priests deserve no
mercy?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

157

have wondered if Jehovah would turn out to be an
empty lie, as Baal had proved to be. After the prayer,
though, there was no time for wondering. The account says: “At that the ?re of Jehovah came falling
and went eating up the burnt o?ering and the pieces
of wood and the stones and the dust, and the water
that was in the trench it licked up.” (1 Ki. 18:38)
What a spectacular answer! And how did the people
respond?
“Jehovah is the true God! Jehovah is the true
God!” they cried out, all of them. (1 Ki. 18:39) At
last they saw the truth. However, they had not as yet
shown any faith. Frankly, to admit that Jehovah is
the true God after seeing ?re fall from heaven in response to a prayer is not an impressive demonstration of faith. So Elijah asked more of them. He asked
them to do what they should have done many years
earlier—obey the Law of Jehovah. God’s Law said
that false prophets and idolaters should be put to
death. (Deut. 13:5-9) These Baal priests were committed enemies of Jehovah God, and they deliberately worked against his purposes. Did they deserve
mercy? Well, what mercy had they ever granted to all
19

158

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

those innocent children who were burned alive as
sacri?ces to Baal? (Read Proverbs 21:13; Jer. 19:5)
Those men were well beyond the reach of mercy! So
Elijah ordered that they be executed, and executed
they were.—1 Ki. 18:40.
20

Modern-day critics may decry the conclusion to

this test on Mount Carmel. Some people may worry
lest religious zealots use it to justify violent acts of
religious intolerance. And sadly, there are many violent religious fanatics today. However, Elijah was no
fanatic. He was acting on Jehovah’s behalf in a just
execution. Furthermore, genuine Christians know
that they cannot follow Elijah’s course in taking a
sword to the wicked. Rather, they follow the standard for all disciples of Jesus as found in Christ’s
words to Peter: “Return your sword to its place, for
all those who take the sword will perish by the
sword.” (Matt. 26:52) Jehovah will use his Son to
carry out divine justice in the future.
21

The responsibility of a true Christian is to lead

20. Why are the concerns of modern-day critics about Elijah’s execution of the Baal priests unfounded?
21. How is Elijah’s example a ?tting one for true Christians today?
HE STOOD UP FOR PURE WORSHIP

159

a life of faith. (John 3:16) One way to do so is to imitate faithful men like Elijah. He worshipped Jehovah exclusively and urged others to do the same. He
boldly exposed as fraudulent a religion that Satan
used to lure people away from Jehovah. And he
trusted Jehovah to settle matters instead of relying
on his own abilities and will. Elijah stood up for
pure worship. May all of us imitate his faith!

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? What can we learn from Elijah about
worshipping Jehovah exclusively?
? How can we imitate Elijah when dealing
with those who disagree with what the Bible
teaches?
? What can we learn from Elijah’s prayer on
Mount Carmel?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Elijah?

160

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

CHAPTER ELEVEN

He Watched, and He Waited
ELIJAH longed to be alone with his heavenly Father.
But the throngs around him had just seen this true
prophet call down ?re from heaven, and many of
the people were no doubt eager to curry favor with
him. Before Elijah could ascend to the heights of
Mount Carmel and approach Jehovah God in private
prayer, he faced an unpleasant task. He had to speak
to King Ahab.
2 The two men could hardly have been more di?erent. Ahab, bedecked in royal ?nery, was a greedy,
weak-willed apostate. Elijah wore the o?cial garb of
a prophet—a simple, rustic robe, possibly of animal
skin or of woven camel or goat hair. He was a man
of great courage, integrity, and faith. The day that
was now drawing to a close had revealed much about
the character of each man.
3 It had been a bad day for Ahab and other Baal
1, 2. Elijah faced what unpleasant task, and in what ways were he and
Ahab di?erent?
3, 4. (a) Why had it been a bad day for Ahab and other Baal worshippers? (b) What questions will we discuss?
HE WATCHED, AND HE WAITED

161

worshippers. The pagan religion that Ahab and his
wife, Queen Jezebel, championed in the ten-tribe
kingdom of Israel had been dealt a severe blow. Baal
had been exposed as a fraud. That lifeless god had
failed to light a simple ?re in response to the frantic
pleas, dances, and ritual bloodletting of his prophets. Baal had failed to protect those 450 men from
their well-deserved execution. But the false god had
failed in something else, and that failure was about
to be made complete. For over three years, the Baal
prophets had implored their god to end the drought
a?icting the land, but Baal had proved unable to do
so. Soon, Jehovah himself would demonstrate his supremacy by ending the drought.—1 Ki. 16:30–17:1;
18:1-40.
4

When, though, would Jehovah act? How would

Elijah conduct himself until then? And what can we
learn from this man of faith? Let us see as we examine the account.—Read 1 Kings 18:41-46.
5

A Prayerful Attitude
Elijah approached Ahab and said: “Go up, eat

5. What did Elijah tell Ahab to do, and does it seem that Ahab had
learned anything from the day’s events?
162

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

and drink; for there is the sound of the turmoil of a
downpour.” Had this wicked king learned anything
from the day’s events? The account does not say speci?cally, but we ?nd here no words of repentance,
no request that the prophet help him approach Jehovah and seek forgiveness. No, Ahab simply “proceeded to go up to eat and drink.” (1 Ki. 18:41, 42)
What about Elijah?
“As for Elijah, he went up to the top of Carmel
and began crouching to the earth and keeping his
face put between his knees.” While Ahab went o? to
?ll his stomach, Elijah had an opportunity to pray
to his heavenly Father. Note the humble posture described here—Elijah on the ground with his head
bowed so low that his face was near his knees. What
was Elijah doing? We need not guess. The Bible,
at James 5:18, tells us that Elijah prayed for the
drought to end. Likely he was o?ering such a prayer
on top of Carmel.
6

Earlier, Jehovah had said: “I am determined
to give rain upon the surface of the ground.”
(1 Ki. 18:1) So Elijah prayed for the ful?llment
7

6, 7. For what did Elijah pray, and why?
HE WATCHED, AND HE WAITED

163

of Jehovah’s stated will, much as Jesus taught his
followers to pray some one thousand years later.
—Matt. 6:9, 10.
8

Elijah’s example teaches us much about prayer.

Foremost in Elijah’s thoughts was the accomplishment of God’s will. When we pray, it is good to remember: “No matter what it is that we ask according to [God’s] will, he hears us.” (1 John 5:14)
Clearly, then, we need to know what God’s will is in
order to pray acceptably—a good reason to make Bible study a part of our daily life. Surely Elijah also
wanted to see an end to the drought because of all
the su?ering among the people of his homeland. His
heart was likely full of thanksgiving after the miracle he had seen Jehovah perform that day. We likewise want our prayers to re?ect heartfelt thanksgiving and concern for the welfare of others.—Read
2 Corinthians 1:11; Philippians 4:6.
9

Con?dent and Watchful
Elijah was sure that Jehovah would act to end the

8. What does Elijah’s example teach us about prayer?
9. What did Elijah direct his attendant to do, and what two qualities
will we consider?
164

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

drought, but he was not sure when Jehovah would
act. So, what did the prophet do in the meantime?
Note what the account says: “He said to his attendant: ‘Go up, please. Look in the direction of the
sea.’ So he went up and looked and then said: ‘There
is nothing at all.’ And he went on to say, ‘Go
back,’ for seven times.” (1 Ki. 18:43) Elijah’s example teaches us at least two lessons. First, note the
prophet’s con?dence. Then, consider his watchfulness.
10

Because Elijah had con?dence in Jehovah’s

promise, he eagerly sought evidence that Jehovah
was about to act. He sent his attendant up to a high
vantage point to scan the horizon for any signs of
impending rain. Upon his return, the attendant delivered this unenthusiastic report: “There is nothing
at all.” The horizon was clear, and the sky, evidently cloudless. Now, did you notice something unusual?
Remember, Elijah had just told King Ahab: “There
is the sound of the turmoil of a downpour.” How
10, 11. (a) In what way did Elijah show his con?dence in Jehovah’s
promise? (b) Why can we have similar con?dence?
HE WATCHED, AND HE WAITED

165

could the prophet say such a thing when there were
no rain clouds to be seen?
11

Elijah knew of Jehovah’s promise. As Jehovah’s

prophet and representative, he was sure that his God
would ful?ll His word. Elijah was con?dent—so
much so that it was as if he could already hear the
downpour. We might be reminded of the Bible’s description of Moses: “He continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.” Is God that real to
you? He provides ample reason for us to put that
kind of faith in him and his promises.—Heb. 11:1, 27.
12

Next, notice how watchful Elijah was. He sent

his attendant back, not once or twice, but seven
times! We might imagine the attendant tiring of such
a repetitive task, but Elijah remained eager for a
sign and did not give up. Finally, after his seventh
trip, the attendant reported: “Look! There is a small
cloud like a man’s palm ascending out of the sea.”
Can you picture that attendant holding his arm outstretched and using his palm to gauge the size of
one little cloud coming up over the horizon of the
12. How did Elijah show that he was watchful, and how did he react
to the news that there was one little cloud?
166

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Great Sea? The attendant may have been unimpressed. To Elijah, though, that cloud was significant. He now gave his attendant urgent directions:
“Go up, say to Ahab, ‘Hitch up! And go down that
the downpour may not detain you!’ ”—1 Ki. 18:44.
13

Again, Elijah set a powerful example for us. We

too live at a time when God will soon act to ful?ll
his stated purpose. Elijah awaited the end of a
drought; God’s servants today await the end of a corrupt world system of things. (1 John 2:17) Until Jehovah God acts, we must keep ever on the watch, as
Elijah did. God’s own Son, Jesus, advised his followers: “Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do
not know on what day your Lord is coming.” (Matt.
24:42) Did Jesus mean that his followers would be
completely in the dark as to when the end would
come? No, for he spoke at length about what the
world would be like in the days leading up to the
end. All of us can observe the ful?llment of this
detailed sign of “the conclusion of the system of
things.”—Read Matthew 24:3-7.
13, 14. (a) How can we imitate Elijah’s watchfulness? (b) What reasons do we have for acting with urgency?
HE WATCHED, AND HE WAITED

167

14

Each facet of that sign furnishes powerful, con-

vincing evidence. Is such evidence enough to move
us to act with urgency in our service to Jehovah?
One little cloud rising from the horizon was enough
to convince Elijah that Jehovah was about to act.
Was the faithful prophet disappointed?
15

Jehovah Brings Relief and Blessings
The account tells us: “It came about in the

meantime that the heavens themselves darkened up
with clouds and wind and a great downpour began
to occur. And Ahab kept riding and made his way to
Jezreel.” (1 Ki. 18:45) Events began to unfold at remarkable speed. While Elijah’s attendant was delivering the prophet’s message to Ahab, that little cloud
became many, ?lling and darkening the sky. A great
wind blew. At last, after three and a half years, rain
fell on the soil of Israel. The parched ground drank
in the drops. As the rain became a downpour, the
river Kishon swelled, no doubt washing away the
blood of the executed Baal prophets. The wayward
15, 16. What events unfolded rapidly, and what might Elijah have wondered about Ahab?
168

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Israelites too were being given a chance to wash
away the terrible stain of Baal worship on the land.
16

Surely Elijah hoped that it would be so! Perhaps

he wondered how Ahab would respond to the dramatic events that were unfolding. Would Ahab repent and turn away from the pollution of Baal worship? The events of the day had furnished powerful
reasons to make such changes. Of course, we cannot
know what was going through Ahab’s mind at the
moment. The account simply tells us that the king
“kept riding and made his way to Jezreel.” Had he
learned anything? Was he resolved to change his
ways? Later events suggest that the answer is no.
Still, the day was not yet over for Ahab—nor for
Elijah.
17

Jehovah’s prophet began to make his way along

the same road Ahab had taken. A long, dark, wet
trek lay ahead of him. But something unusual happened next.
18

“The very hand of Jehovah proved to be upon

17, 18. (a) What happened to Elijah on the road to Jezreel? (b) What
was remarkable about Elijah’s running from Carmel to Jezreel? (See
also footnote.)
HE WATCHED, AND HE WAITED

169

Elijah, so that he girded up his hips and went running ahead of Ahab all the way to Jezreel.” (1 Ki. 18:
46) Clearly, “the very hand of Jehovah” was acting
on Elijah in a supernatural way. Jezreel was 19 miles
distant, and Elijah was no youth.1 Just picture that
prophet girding up his long garments, tying them
at his hips so that his legs would have freedom
of movement, and then running along that raindrenched road—running so fast that he caught up
with, passed, and outpaced the royal chariot!
What a blessing that must have been for Elijah!
To feel such strength, vitality, and stamina—perhaps
even more than he had ever felt in his youth—must
have proved a thrilling experience. We might recall
the prophecies that guarantee perfect health and vigor to faithful ones in the coming earthly Paradise.
(Read Isaiah 35:6; Luke 23:43) As Elijah raced along
that wet road, he surely knew that he had the approval of his Father, the only true God, Jehovah!
19

1 Soon after this, Jehovah would assign Elijah to train Elisha, who
would become known as the one “who poured out water upon the
hands of Elijah.” (2 Ki. 3:11) Elisha acted as Elijah’s attendant, evidently o?ering practical assistance to an older man.

19. (a) Elijah’s God-given energy and stamina may remind us of what
prophecies? (b) As Elijah ran to Jezreel, what did he surely know?
170

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Jehovah is eager to bless us. Let us reach out for
his blessings; they are worth every e?ort we can
make. Like Elijah, we need to be watchful, carefully
weighing the powerful evidence showing that Jehovah is about to act in these dangerous and urgent
times. Like Elijah, we have every reason to place
complete con?dence in the promises of Jehovah,
“the God of truth.”—Ps. 31:5.
20

20. How can we reach out for Jehovah’s blessings?

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Elijah show a prayerful attitude?
? How did Elijah display his con?dence in
Jehovah’s promise?
? Elijah set what example regarding
watchfulness?
? What would you like to do in order to imitate
Elijah’s faith?

HE WATCHED, AND HE WAITED

171

CHAPTER TWELVE

He Took Comfort in His God
ELIJAH ran through the rain as the darkness deepened. He had a long way to go before he would reach
Jezreel, and he was no young man. Yet, he ran on
tirelessly, for “the very hand of Jehovah” was upon
him. The energy coursing through his body was surely unlike any he had ever known. Why, he had
just outpaced the team of horses that was pulling
King Ahab in his royal chariot!—Read 1 Kings 18:46.
2

Now the open road lay before him. Imagine Eli-

jah blinking the raindrops from his eyes as he ran,
thinking back over the most eventful day of his life.
Without question, it was a glorious victory for Elijah’s God, Jehovah, and for true worship. Far behind
him, lost in the gloom of the storm, lay the windswept heights of Mount Carmel, where Jehovah had
used Elijah to strike a mighty and miraculous blow
against Baal worship. Hundreds of Baal prophets
were exposed as wicked frauds and justly executed.
1, 2. What happened on the most eventful day of Elijah’s life?
172

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Then Elijah prayed to Jehovah for an end to the
drought that had a?icted the land for three and a
half years. The rains fell!—1 Ki. 18:18-45.
3

As Elijah splashed along those 19 miles to Jezre-

el, his hopes might have been high. It may have
seemed to him that a real turning point had come at
last. Ahab would have to change! After what he had
witnessed, surely he had no choice but to abandon
Baal worship; to restrain his queen, Jezebel; and to
stop the persecution of Jehovah’s servants.
4

When things seem to be going our way, it is only

natural that our hopes rise. We may imagine that our
lot in life will continue to improve, perhaps even
thinking that our worst problems are ?nally behind
us. If Elijah thought that way, no wonder, for he
“was a man with feelings like ours.” (Jas. 5:17) Actually, though, Elijah’s problems were far from over.
In fact, within hours Elijah would be so fearful, so
low in spirits, that he would wish to die. What happened, and how did Jehovah help his prophet to renew his faith and his courage? Let us see.
3, 4. (a) Why might Elijah’s hopes have been high as he made his way
to Jezreel? (b) What questions will we consider?
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

173

5

An Unexpected Turn of Events
When Ahab reached his palace in Jezreel, did he

give any evidence of being a changed man? We read:
“Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done and all
about how he had killed all the prophets with the
sword.” (1 Ki. 19:1) Notice that Ahab’s account of
the day’s events left out Elijah’s God, Jehovah. A
?eshly man, Ahab saw the day’s miraculous events
in strictly human terms—what “Elijah had done.”
Clearly, he had not learned to respect Jehovah God.
And how did his vengeful wife react?
6

Jezebel was furious! Livid with rage, she sent this

message to Elijah: “So may the gods do, and so may
they add to it, if at this time tomorrow I shall not
make your soul like the soul of each one of them!”
(1 Ki. 19:2) This was a death threat of the worst
kind. In e?ect, Jezebel was vowing that she herself
should die if she could not have Elijah killed within
the day to avenge her Baal prophets. Imagine Elijah
being awakened from sleep in some humble lodging
5. After the events on Mount Carmel, had Ahab learned to respect Jehovah more, and how do we know?
6. What message did Jezebel send to Elijah, and what did it mean?
174

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

in Jezreel on that stormy night—only to hear the
queen’s messenger deliver those awful words. How
was he a?ected?
7

Overcome by Discouragement and Fear
If Elijah cherished any notions that the war

against Baal worship was all but over, his hopes
came crashing down at that moment. Jezebel was undeterred. A great many of Elijah’s faithful colleagues
had already been executed on her orders, and now, it
seemed, he was to be next. What e?ect did Jezebel’s
threat have on Elijah? The Bible tells us: “He became afraid.” Did Elijah picture in his mind’s eye the
terrible death that Jezebel had in store for him? If
he dwelled on such thoughts, it is no wonder that his
courage failed him. At any rate, Elijah “began to go
for his soul”—he ran for his life.—1 Ki. 18:4; 19:3.
8

Elijah was not the only man of faith ever to be

overcome by fear. Much later, the apostle Peter had
a similar problem. For instance, when Jesus enabled
Peter to join Him in walking on water, the apostle
7. What e?ect did Jezebel’s threat have on Elijah, and what did he do?
8. (a) How was Peter’s problem similar to that of Elijah? (b) What lesson can we learn from Elijah and Peter?
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

175

began “looking at the windstorm.” He then lost his
courage and started to sink. (Read Matthew 14:30.)
The examples of Elijah and Peter thus teach us a
valuable lesson. If we want to maintain our courage,
we must not let our mind dwell on the dangers that
frighten us. We need to keep our focus on the Source
of our hope and strength.
9

“It Is Enough!”
Driven by fear, Elijah ?ed southwestward some

95 miles to Beer-sheba, a town near the southern
border of Judah. There he left his attendant behind
and struck out into the wilderness alone. The record
says that he went “a day’s journey,” so we may picture him starting o? at sunrise, evidently carrying no
provisions with him. Depressed, spurred ever onward by fear, he struggled over the rough and wild
terrain under the blazing sun. As that glaring disk
gradually reddened and sank to the horizon, Elijah’s
strength gave out. Exhausted, he sat down under a
broom tree—the closest thing to shelter in that barren landscape.—1 Ki. 19:4.
9. Describe Elijah’s journey and his state of mind as he ?ed.
176

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Elijah prayed in utter desperation. He asked to
die. He said: “I am no better than my forefathers.”
10

He knew that his forefathers were then mere dust
and bones in the grave, unable to do any good for
anybody. (Eccl. 9:10) Elijah felt just as worthless. No
wonder he cried out: “It is enough!” Why go on living?
11

Should it be shocking to learn that a man of God

could become so low in spirits? Not necessarily. A
number of faithful men and women in the Bible record are described as feeling so sad that they wished
for death—among them Rebekah, Jacob, Moses, and
Job.—Gen. 25:22; 37:35; Num. 11:13-15; Job 14:13.
12

Today, we live in “critical times hard to deal

with,” so it is not surprising that many people, even
faithful servants of God, ?nd themselves feeling
low at times. (2 Tim. 3:1) If you ever ?nd yourself in such a dire situation, follow Elijah’s example in this respect: Pour out your feelings to God.
10, 11. (a) What was the meaning of Elijah’s prayer to Jehovah?
(b) Using the cited scriptures, describe the feelings of other godly individuals who became low in spirits.
12. If you ever ?nd yourself feeling very low, in what respect should
you follow Elijah’s example?
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

177

After all, Jehovah is “the God of all comfort.” (Read
2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.) Did he comfort Elijah?
13

Jehovah Sustained His Prophet
How do you think Jehovah felt as he looked

down from heaven and saw his beloved prophet lying
under that tree in the wilderness and begging for
death to take him? We do not have to guess. After
Elijah sank into sleep, Jehovah sent an angel to him.
The angel gently woke Elijah with a touch and said:
“Rise up, eat.” Elijah did so, for the angel had kindly set out a simple meal for him—fresh, warm bread
along with water. Did he even thank the angel? The
record says only that the prophet ate and drank and
went back to sleep. Was he too despondent to speak?
At any rate, the angel woke him a second time, perhaps at dawn. Once more, he urged Elijah, “Rise up,
eat,” and he added these remarkable words, “for the
journey is too much for you.”—1 Ki. 19:5-7.
14

Thanks to God-given insight, the angel knew

where Elijah was headed. He also knew that the jour13, 14. (a) How did Jehovah by means of an angel show loving concern
for His troubled prophet? (b) Why is it comforting that Jehovah knows
all about each one of us, including our limitations?
178

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

ney would be too much for Elijah to carry out in his
own strength. What a comfort to serve a God who
knows our goals and our limitations better than we
do! (Read Psalm 103:13, 14.) How did Elijah bene?t
from that meal?
15

We read: “He rose up and ate and drank, and he

kept going in the power of that nourishment for forty days and forty nights as far as the mountain of
the true God, Horeb.” (1 Ki. 19:8) Like Moses some
six centuries before him and Jesus nearly ten centuries after him, Elijah fasted for 40 days and 40
nights. (Ex. 34:28; Luke 4:1, 2) That one meal did not
make all his problems go away, but it sustained
him miraculously. Imagine that older man trudging
through the trackless wilderness day after day, week
after week, for nearly a month and a half!
16

Jehovah sustains his servants today as well, not

with miraculous physical meals, but in a far more vital way. He provides for his servants spiritually.
(Matt. 4:4) Learning about God from his Word and
15, 16. (a) What did nourishment from Jehovah enable Elijah to do?
(b) Why should we appreciate the way that Jehovah sustains his servants today?
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

179

from publications that are carefully based on the Bible sustains us spiritually. Taking in such spiritual
nourishment may not make all our problems go
away, but it can help us endure what might otherwise be unendurable. It also leads to “everlasting
life.”—John 17:3.
Elijah walked nearly 200 miles until he ?nally
reached Mount Horeb. It was a place of great significance, for there Jehovah God through an angel had
long before appeared to Moses in the burning thornbush and there Jehovah had later made the Law covenant with Israel. Elijah found shelter in a cave.
17

How Jehovah Comforted and Strengthened His Prophet
18 At Horeb, Jehovah’s “word”—evidently delivered
by a spirit messenger—posed this simple question:
“What is your business here, Elijah?” The question
was likely spoken in a gentle way, for Elijah took it
as an invitation to pour out his feelings. And pour
them out he did! He said: “I have been absolutely
jealous for Jehovah the God of armies; for the sons
17. Where did Elijah go, and why was that place signi?cant?
18, 19. (a) Jehovah’s spirit messenger posed what question, and how
did Elijah respond? (b) Elijah revealed what three reasons for his low
spirits?
180

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

of Israel have left your covenant, your altars they
have torn down, and your prophets they have killed
with the sword, so that I only am left; and they begin looking for my soul to take it away.” (1 Ki. 19:9,
10) Elijah’s words reveal at least three reasons for
his low spirits.
19

First, Elijah felt that his work had been in vain.

Despite years of being “absolutely jealous” in serving Jehovah, putting God’s sacred name and worship
above all else, Elijah saw that conditions seemed
only to have grown worse. The people were still
faithless and rebellious, while false worship was running rampant. Second, Elijah felt alone. “I only am
left,” he said, as if in that nation he were the last
man who still served Jehovah. Third, Elijah was
scared. Many of his fellow prophets had already
been killed, and he was convinced that he was next.
It may not have been easy for Elijah to admit to
those feelings, but he did not let pride or embarrassment hold him back. By opening his heart to his God
in prayer, he set a good example for all faithful people.—Ps. 62:8.
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

181

20

How did Jehovah address Elijah’s fears and con-

cerns? The angel told Elijah to stand at the mouth
of the cave. He obeyed, not knowing what was in
store. A mighty wind sprang up! It must have emitted a deafening roar, for it was so powerful that it
tore mountains and crags apart. Picture Elijah trying
to shield his eyes while clinging to his heavy, rustic
garment of hair as the gusts whipped it about him.
Then he had to struggle to keep his footing, for the
very earth began to heave and toss—an earthquake
shook the region! He had barely recovered when a
great ?re swept through, forcing him back into the
cave to shield himself from the searing heat.—1 Ki.
19:11, 12.
21

In each case, the account reminds us that Jeho-

vah was not to be found within these spectacular displays of nature’s power. Elijah knew that Jehovah
was not some mythical nature god such as Baal, who
was hailed by his deluded worshippers as “the rider
of the clouds,” or bringer of rains. Jehovah is the real
20, 21. (a) Describe what Elijah witnessed from the mouth of the cave
on Mount Horeb. (b) What did Jehovah’s displays of power teach Elijah?
182

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

Source of all the awesome power found in nature,
but he is also vastly greater than anything he has
made. Even the physical heavens cannot contain
him! (1 Ki. 8:27) How did all of this help Elijah? Remember his fear. With a God like Jehovah on his
side, a God who had all that overwhelming power at
His disposal, Elijah had nothing to fear from Ahab
and Jezebel!—Read Psalm 118:6.
After the ?re was gone, a hush fell and Elijah
heard “a calm, low voice.” It invited Elijah to express
himself again, and he did so, pouring out his concerns a second time.1 Perhaps that brought him further relief. Undoubtedly, though, Elijah found even
more comfort in what the “calm, low voice” told him
next. Jehovah reassured Elijah that he was far from
22

1 The source of this “calm, low voice” may have been the same
spirit who was used to deliver “Jehovah’s word” mentioned at
1 Kings 19:9. In verse 15, this spirit is referred to simply as “Jehovah.” We might be reminded of the spirit emissary whom Jehovah
used to guide Israel in the wilderness and of whom God said:
“My name is within him.” (Ex. 23:21) We cannot be dogmatic on
this point, of course, but it is worth noting that in his prehuman
existence, Jesus served as “the Word,” the special Spokesman to Jehovah’s servants.—John 1:1.

22. (a) How did the “calm, low voice” reassure Elijah that he was far
from worthless? (b) Who might have been the source of the “calm, low
voice”? (See footnote.)
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

183

worthless. How so? God revealed much of his longrange purpose regarding the war against Baal worship in Israel. Clearly, Elijah’s work had not been in
vain, for God’s purpose was moving inexorably forward. Furthermore, Elijah still ?gured in that purpose, for Jehovah sent him back to work with some
speci?c instructions.—1 Ki. 19:12-17.
23

What about Elijah’s feelings of loneliness? Jeho-

vah did two things about that. First, he told Elijah
to anoint Elisha as the prophet who would eventually succeed him. This younger man would become Elijah’s companion and helper for a number of years.
How practical that comfort was! Second, Jehovah revealed this thrilling news: “I have let seven thousand
remain in Israel, all the knees that have not bent
down to Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed
him.” (1 Ki. 19:18) Elijah was far from alone. It must
have warmed his heart to hear of those thousands of
faithful people who refused to worship Baal. They
needed Elijah to keep up his faithful service, to set
an example of unshakable loyalty to Jehovah in
23. In what two ways did Jehovah address Elijah’s feelings of loneliness?
184

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

those dark times. Elijah must have been deeply
touched to hear those words through Jehovah’s messenger, the “calm, low voice” of his God.
Like Elijah, we may be awestruck by the immense natural forces evident in creation, and rightly
so. Creation vividly re?ects the power of the Creator.
(Rom. 1:20) Jehovah still loves to use his limitless
might to help his faithful servants. (2 Chron. 16:9)
However, God speaks most fully to us through the
pages of his Word, the Bible. (Read Isaiah 30:21.) In
a sense, the Bible can be like that “calm, low voice”
if we let it guide us today. In its precious pages, Jehovah corrects us, encourages us, and reassures us
of his love.
24

Did Elijah accept the comfort Jehovah gave him
on Mount Horeb? Without a doubt! Soon he was
back in action, once more the bold, faithful prophet
who stood up against the wickedness of false worship. If we likewise take to heart the inspired words
of God, “the comfort from the Scriptures,” we will
be able to imitate the faith of Elijah.—Rom. 15:4.
25

24, 25. (a) In what sense can we listen to Jehovah’s “calm, low voice”
today? (b) Why can we be sure that Elijah accepted the comfort Jehovah gave him?
HE TOOK COMFORT IN HIS GOD

185

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? What events led Elijah to become very low in
spirits?
? What feelings contributed to Elijah’s
discouragement?
? In what ways did Jehovah comfort Elijah?
? How will you imitate Elijah if you ever become
discouraged?

186

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ELIJAH

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

He Learned From His Mistakes
JONAH wished he could shut out the terrible
sounds. It was not just the ?erce wind, which was
shrieking through the ship’s rigging; nor was it
just the mountainous waves, which were thundering
against the sides of the vessel, making her every timber creak and groan. No, far worse to Jonah were
the shouts of those mariners, the captain and his
crew, as they struggled to keep the ship a?oat. Jonah felt sure that those men were about to die—all
because of him!
2

What had put Jonah in such dire straits? He had

made a serious mistake in his dealings with his God,
Jehovah. What had he done? Were matters beyond
repair? The answers can teach us much. For example, Jonah’s story helps us to see how even those
with genuine faith can go astray—and how they can
make amends.
1, 2. (a) What had Jonah brought on himself and the mariners on the
ship? (b) How can Jonah’s story help us?
HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

187

3

A Prophet From Galilee
When people think of the man Jonah, they often

seem to focus on negative traits, such as his lapses
into disobedience or even his hardheadedness. But
there was far more to the man than that. Remember, Jonah was selected to serve as a prophet of Jehovah God. Jehovah would not have picked him for
such a weighty responsibility had he been unfaithful or unrighteous.
4

The Bible reveals a little about Jonah’s back-

ground. (Read 2 Kings 14:25.) He was from Gathhepher, just two and a half miles from Nazareth, the
town where Jesus Christ would grow up some eight
centuries later.1 Jonah served as a prophet during
the reign of King Jeroboam II of the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel. The time of Elijah was long past; his
1 Jonah’s origin in a Galilean town is noteworthy because when
referring to Jesus, the Pharisees arrogantly said: “Search and see
that no prophet is to be raised up out of Galilee.” (John 7:52)
Many translators and researchers suggest that the Pharisees were
making a sweeping generalization that no prophet had ever arisen
or ever could arise out of lowly Galilee. If so, those men were ignoring history as well as prophecy.—Isa. 9:1, 2.

3-5. (a) What do people often focus on when they think of Jonah?
(b) What do we know about Jonah’s background? (See also footnote.)
(c) Why was Jonah’s service as a prophet not easy or pleasant?
188

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

successor, Elisha, had died during the reign of Jeroboam’s father. Although Jehovah had used those
men to wipe out Baal worship, Israel was willfully
going astray again. The land was now under the in?uence of a king who “continued to do what was
bad in Jehovah’s eyes.” (2 Ki. 14:24) So Jonah’s service could not have been easy or pleasant. Yet, he
carried it out faithfully.
One day, though, Jonah’s life took a dramatic
turn. He received an assignment from Jehovah that
he found to be extremely di?cult. What was Jehovah asking him to do?
5

“Get Up, Go to Nineveh”
6 Jehovah told Jonah: “Get up, go to Nineveh the
great city, and proclaim against her that their badness has come up before me.” (Jonah 1:2) It is not
hard to see why this assignment might have appeared daunting. Nineveh lay some 500 miles to the
east, an overland journey that would likely take
about a month on foot. However, the hardships of
such a trek might have seemed the easy part of the
6. What assignment did Jehovah give to Jonah, and why may it have
appeared daunting?
HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

189

job. At Nineveh, Jonah was to deliver Jehovah’s
judgment message to the Assyrians, who were notoriously violent, even savage. If Jonah had seen little
response among God’s own people, what could he
hope to see among those pagans? How would a lone
servant of Jehovah fare in vast Nineveh, which
would come to be called “the city of bloodshed”?
—Nah. 3:1, 7.
7

Such thoughts may well have occurred to Jonah.

We do not know. What we do know is that he ran.
Jehovah had directed him to go east; Jonah headed
west, and as far west as he could go. He went down
to the coast, to a port city named Joppa, where he
found a ship headed to Tarshish. Some scholars say
that Tarshish was in Spain. If so, Jonah was heading some 2,200 miles away from Nineveh. Such a
voyage to the far end of the Great Sea might have
taken as long as a year. Jonah was that determined
to get away from the assignment Jehovah had given
him!—Read Jonah 1:3.
7, 8. (a) Just how determined was Jonah to get away from the assignment that Jehovah had given him? (b) Why should we not judge Jonah
a coward?
190

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

Does this mean that we can dismiss Jonah as a
coward? We should not be too quick to judge him.
As we shall see, he was capable of remarkable personal courage. Like all of us, though, Jonah was
an imperfect human struggling with a great many
faults. (Ps. 51:5) Who of us has never grappled with
fear?
8

It may occasionally seem that God asks us to do
what strikes us as di?cult, even impossible. We may
even ?nd it daunting to preach the good news of
God’s Kingdom, as Christians are required to do.
(Matt. 24:14) It is all too easy for us to forget the
profound truth that Jesus uttered: “All things are
possible with God.” (Mark 10:27) If at times we lose
sight of that truth, perhaps we can understand
Jonah’s di?culty. What, though, were the consequences of Jonah’s ?ight?
9

Jehovah Disciplines His Wayward Prophet
10 We can just imagine Jonah getting himself
situated on that vessel, likely a Phoenician cargo
9. How might we occasionally feel about an assignment from Jehovah,
and what truth do we need to remember at such times?
10, 11. (a) What may Jonah have hoped as the cargo ship left port?
(b) What danger came upon the ship and the crew?
HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

191

ship. He watched as the captain and his crew bustled about to get their craft under way and out
of port. As the shoreline slowly receded and disappeared, Jonah may have hoped he was escaping
the danger he so dreaded. But suddenly, the weather changed.
11 Strong winds churned up the sea into a nightmarish rage, with waves that might dwarf even
modern-day vessels. How long did it take for that
wooden craft to seem terribly small and frail, lost in
a watery wilderness of towering waves and plunging
canyons? Did Jonah know, at that point, what he later wrote—that “Jehovah himself hurled forth a
great wind at the sea”? It is hard to say. He saw,
though, that the mariners began crying out to their
various gods, and he knew that no help would come
from that direction. (Lev. 19:4) His account says: “As
for the ship, it was about to be wrecked.” (Jonah
1:4) And how could Jonah pray to the God he was
running from?
12 Feeling powerless to help, Jonah went below the
12. (a) Why should we not be too quick to judge Jonah for sleeping as
the storm raged? (See also footnote.) (b) How did Jehovah reveal the
cause of the trouble?
192

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

deck of the ship and found a place to lie down.
There, he went fast asleep.1 The captain found Jonah, woke him up, and urged him to pray to his god,
as everyone else was doing. Convinced that there
was something supernatural about this storm, the
seamen cast lots to see which of the people on
board might be the cause of their trouble. No doubt
Jonah’s heart sank as the lots eliminated one man
after another. Soon the truth was plain. Jehovah was
directing the storm, as well as the lots, toward one
man—Jonah!—Read Jonah 1:5-7.
13

Jonah told the sailors everything. He was a ser-

vant of the almighty God, Jehovah. This was the
God he was running from and had o?ended, putting
them all in this terrible danger. The men were
aghast; Jonah could see the terror in their eyes.
1 The Septuagint stresses the depth of Jonah’s slumber by adding
that he snored. However, lest we judge Jonah’s sleep as a sign of
indi?erence on his part, we might recall that sometimes an urge to
sleep overcomes those who are very low in spirits. During Jesus’
agonizing hours in the garden of Gethsemane, Peter, James, and
John were “slumbering from grief.”—Luke 22:45.

13. (a) What did Jonah confess to the sailors? (b) What did Jonah urge
the sailors to do, and why?
HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

193

They asked him what they should do to him in order to save the ship and their lives. What did he say?
Jonah may have shuddered to think of himself
drowning in that cold, wild sea. But how could he
send all these men to such a death when he knew he
could save them? So he urged them: “Lift me up and
hurl me into the sea, and the sea will become still
for you; because I am aware that it is on my account
that this great tempest is upon you.”—Jonah 1:12.
14

Hardly the words of a coward, are they? It must

have warmed Jehovah’s heart to see Jonah’s brave,
self-sacri?cing spirit in that dire moment. Here we
see Jonah’s faith at its best. We can imitate it today
by putting the welfare of others ahead of our own.
(John 13:34, 35) When we see someone in need,
whether physically, emotionally, or spiritually, do
we give of ourselves in order to help out? How we
please Jehovah when we do so!
15

Perhaps the sailors were moved too, for at ?rst

they refused to comply! Instead, they did everything
14, 15. (a) How can we imitate Jonah’s faith at its best? (b) How did
the sailors respond to Jonah’s request?
194

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

they could to work their way through the storm
—but to no avail. The tempest only grew worse.
Finally, they saw that they had no choice. Calling
out to Jonah’s God, Jehovah, to show them mercy,
they lifted the man up and hurled him over the side,
into the sea.—Jonah 1:13-15.
Jonah Finds Mercy and Deliverance
16 Jonah plummeted into the raging waves. Perhaps he struggled, ?oundering a bit, and saw amid
a chaos of foam and spray that the ship was swiftly
moving away. But the mighty breakers crashed over
him and forced him under. He sank down and down,
sensing that all hope was gone.

Jonah later described how he felt at this time.
Fleeting images crossed his mind. He thought with
sadness that he would never again see the beautiful
temple of Jehovah in Jerusalem. He had the sensation of descending to the very depths of the sea,
near the roots of the mountains, where seaweed entangled him. This, it seemed, was to be his pit, his
grave.—Read Jonah 2:2-6.
17

16, 17. Describe what happened to Jonah when he was thrown from the
ship. (See also the pictures in the standard edition.)
HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

195

18

But wait! There was something moving nearby

—an immense, dark shape, a living thing. Looming
close, it darted at him. A great maw opened over
him, engulfed him, swallowed him down!
19

This must be the end. Yet, Jonah sensed some-

thing astounding. He was still alive! He was neither
crushed, nor digested, nor even su?ocated. No, the
breath of life was still in him, though he was in what
should rightly be his grave. Slowly, Jonah became
?lled with awe. Without a doubt, it was his God, Jehovah, who had “appointed a great ?sh to swallow
Jonah.”1—Jonah 1:17.
20

Minutes passed, stretching into hours. There, in

the deepest darkness he had ever known, Jonah
1 When translated into Greek, the Hebrew word for “?sh” was
rendered “sea monster,” or “huge ?sh.” Although there is no way
to determine exactly what kind of sea creature was involved, it has
been observed that there are sharks in the Mediterranean large
enough to swallow a man whole. There are far larger sharks elsewhere; the whale shark can reach up to 45 feet in length—possibly
even more!

18, 19. What happened to Jonah in the depths of the sea, what kind
of creature was involved, and who was behind these events? (See also
footnote.)
20. What can we learn about Jonah from the prayer he uttered inside
the great ?sh?
196

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

composed his thoughts and prayed to Jehovah God.
His prayer, recorded fully in the second chapter of
Jonah, is revealing. It shows that Jonah had extensive knowledge of the Scriptures, for it often refers
to the Psalms. It also shows a heartwarming quality: gratitude. Jonah concluded: “As for me, with the
voice of thanksgiving I will sacri?ce to you. What I
have vowed, I will pay. Salvation belongs to Jehovah.”—Jonah 2:9.
There, in the unlikeliest of places—the “inward
parts of the ?sh”—Jonah learned that salvation is
something that Jehovah can bring to anyone, anywhere, anytime. Even there, Jehovah found and
saved his troubled servant. (Jonah 1:17) Only Jehovah could keep a man alive and well for three days
and three nights in the belly of a great ?sh. It is
good for us to remember today that Jehovah is “the
God in whose hand your breath is.” (Dan. 5:23) We
owe our every breath, our very existence, to him.
Are we grateful? Do we not, then, owe Jehovah our
obedience?
21

21. What did Jonah learn about salvation, and what valuable lesson
may we remember?
HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

197

What about Jonah? Did he learn to show his
gratitude to Jehovah through obedience? He did. After three days and three nights, the ?sh brought Jonah right to the shore and “vomited out Jonah onto
the dry land.” (Jonah 2:10) Imagine—after all that,
Jonah did not even have to swim ashore! Of course,
he did have to ?nd his way from that beach, wherever it was. Before long, though, his spirit of gratitude was put to the test. Jonah 3:1, 2, says: “Then
the word of Jehovah occurred to Jonah the second
time, saying: ‘Get up, go to Nineveh the great city,
and proclaim to her the proclamation that I am
speaking to you.’ ” What would Jonah do?
22

Jonah did not hesitate. We read: “At that, Jonah
got up and went to Nineveh in accord with the word
of Jehovah.” (Jonah 3:3) Yes, he obeyed. Clearly, he
had learned from his mistakes. In this too we need
to imitate Jonah’s faith. We all sin; we all make mistakes. (Rom. 3:23) But do we give up, or do we learn
from our mistakes and turn to a course of obedient
service to God?
23

22, 23. (a) How was Jonah’s gratitude soon put to the test? (b) What
can we learn from Jonah when it comes to the mistakes we make?
198

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

Did Jehovah reward Jonah for his obedience?
Indeed he did. For one thing, it seems that Jonah
eventually learned that those sailors had survived.
The storm abated immediately after Jonah’s selfsacri?cing act, and those mariners “began to fear Jehovah greatly” and made a sacri?ce to him instead
of to their false gods.—Jonah 1:15, 16.
24

An even greater reward came much later. Jesus
used Jonah’s time in the huge ?sh as a prophetic picture of his own time in the grave, or Sheol. (Read
Matthew 12:38-40.) How thrilled Jonah will be to
learn of that blessing when he is resurrected to life
on the earth! (John 5:28, 29) Jehovah wants to bless
you too. Like Jonah, will you learn from your mistakes and display an obedient, sel?ess spirit?
25

24, 25. (a) Jonah eventually received what reward in his own lifetime?
(b) What rewards await Jonah in the future?

HE LEARNED FROM HIS MISTAKES

199

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? Can you sympathize with Jonah’s fear of an
assignment from Jehovah?
? How did Jehovah show patience and mercy as
he taught Jonah about obedience?
? How did Jonah show that he had learned from
his mistakes?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Jonah?

200

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

He Learned a Lesson in Mercy
JONAH would have plenty of time to think. Before
him lay a journey of more than 500 miles, an overland trek that would take him about a month, perhaps even longer. To begin, he had to choose between the shorter routes and the safer ones and then
steadily make his way through valleys and over
mountain passes beyond counting. He likely had to
skirt the vast Syrian Desert, ford such rivers as the
mighty Euphrates, and seek shelter among foreigners in the towns and villages of Syria, Mesopotamia,
and Assyria. As the days passed, he thought about
the destination that he so dreaded, the city that
drew closer with each step he took—Nineveh.
2

One thing Jonah knew for certain: He could not

turn around and run away from this assignment. He
had tried that before. As we saw in the preceding
1. What kind of journey lay ahead of Jonah, and how did he feel about
his destination?
2. How had Jonah learned that he could not run away from his assignment?
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

201

chapter, Jehovah patiently taught Jonah by means of
a windstorm at sea and a miraculous rescue involving a huge ?sh. Three days later, Jonah was vomited out alive onto a beach, an awed and more compliant man.—Jonah, chaps. 1, 2.
3

When Jehovah ordered Jonah to Nineveh the sec-

ond time, the prophet obediently headed east on this
long journey. (Read Jonah 3:1-3.) However, had he
allowed Jehovah’s discipline to work a thorough
change in him? For instance, Jehovah had shown
him mercy, saving him from drowning, holding back
punishment for his rebellion, and giving him a second chance to carry out this assignment. After all of
this, had Jonah learned to show mercy to others?
Learning to show mercy is often di?cult for imperfect humans. Let us see what we can gather from Jonah’s struggle.
A Message of Judgment and a Surprising Response
4 Jonah did not see Nineveh as Jehovah did. We
3. What quality had Jehovah shown toward Jonah, yet what question
arises?
4, 5. Why did Jehovah refer to Nineveh as “the great city,” and what
does that teach us about him?
202

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

read: “Now Nineveh herself proved to be a city great
to God.” (Jonah 3:3) Three times, the record of Jonah quotes Jehovah as referring to “Nineveh the
great city.” (Jonah 1:2; 3:2; 4:11) Why was this city
great, or important, to Jehovah?
5

Nineveh was ancient, being among the ?rst cities

that Nimrod established after the Flood. It was vast,
a metropolitan region that evidently included several other cities, requiring a man three days to
walk from one end to the other. (Gen. 10:11; Jonah
3:3) Nineveh was impressive, with stately temples,
mighty walls, and other edi?ces. But none of these
factors made the city important to Jehovah God.
What mattered to him were the people. Nineveh had
a huge population for that time. Despite the people’s badness, Jehovah cared about them. He values
human life and the potential that each individual has for repenting and learning to do what is right.
6

When Jonah ?nally entered Nineveh, its sizable

population of more than 120,000 may have made
6. (a) Why might Jonah have found Nineveh intimidating? (See also
footnote.) (b) What do we learn about Jonah from the preaching work
that he carried out?
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

203

the place only more intimidating.1 He walked for a
day, penetrating ever deeper into that teeming metropolis, perhaps looking for a suitable central location to start spreading his message. How would he
reach these people? Had he learned to speak the Assyrian tongue? Or did Jehovah grant him that ability through a miracle? We do not know. It may be
that Jonah made his proclamation in his native Hebrew and used an interpreter to relate it to the Ninevites. At any rate, his message was simple and not
likely to win him any favor: “Only forty days more,
and Nineveh will be overthrown.” (Jonah 3:4) He
spoke out boldly and repeatedly. In doing so, he
showed remarkable courage and faith, qualities that
Christians today need more than ever.
Jonah’s message got the Ninevites’ attention. No
doubt he braced himself for a hostile and violent response. Instead, something remarkable happened.
7

1 It has been estimated that Samaria, the capital of the ten-tribe
kingdom of Israel, may have had some 20,000 to 30,000 inhabitants
in Jonah’s day—less than a fourth of Nineveh’s population. In its
heyday, Nineveh may have been the largest city in the world.

7, 8. (a) How did the people of Nineveh respond to Jonah’s message?
(b) What did the king of Nineveh do in response to Jonah’s proclamation?
204

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

People listened! His words spread like wild?re. Before long, the whole city was talking about Jonah’s
prophecy of doom. (Read Jonah 3:5.) Rich and poor,
strong and weak, young and old were all caught up
in the same repentant spirit. They abstained from
food. News of this popular movement soon reached
the ears of the king.
8 The king too responded to Jonah’s proclamation.
Struck with godly fear, he rose up from his throne,
removed his luxurious robes of state, put on the
same rough clothing that his people were wearing,
and even “sat down in the ashes.” With his “great
ones,” or nobles, he issued a decree that turned the
fast from a spontaneous popular movement into an
o?cial action of state. He ordered that all wear sackcloth, even the domestic animals.1 He humbly acknowledged that his people were guilty of badness
and violence. Expressing hope that the true God
would soften upon seeing their repentance, the king
said: “God may . . . turn back from his burning anger, so that we may not perish.”—Jonah 3:6-9.
1 This detail may seem odd, but it is not without precedent in
ancient times. Greek historian Herodotus noted that the ancient
Persians grieved over the death of a popular general by including
their livestock in the customs of mourning.
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

205

9

Some critics express doubt that such a change of

heart could have occurred so quickly among the
Ninevites. However, Bible scholars have noted that
a movement of that kind was not out of keeping with
the superstitious and volatile nature of people of
such cultures in ancient times. Further, we know
that such critics are mistaken, for Jesus Christ himself later referred to the repentance of the Ninevites.
(Read Matthew 12:41.) Jesus knew what he was talking about, for he had been alive in heaven to witness
those events as they unfolded. (John 8:57, 58) The
truth is, we should never assume that it is impossible for people to repent—no matter how vicious
they may seem to us. Only Jehovah can read what
lies within the human heart.

10

A Contrast B etween
Divine Mercy and Human Rigidity
How did Jehovah react to the Ninevites’ repen-

tance? Jonah later wrote: “The true God got to see
9. Critics have expressed what doubt regarding the Ninevites, but how
do we know that the critics are mistaken?
10, 11. (a) How did Jehovah respond to the repentance of the Ninevites? (b) Why can we be sure that Jehovah’s judgment was not in
error?
206

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

their works, that they had turned back from their
bad way; and so the true God felt regret over the calamity that he had spoken of causing to them; and
he did not cause it.”—Jonah 3:10.
Does this mean that Jehovah decided that his
own judgment about Nineveh had been in error? No.
The Bible explains that Jehovah’s justice is perfect.
(Read Deuteronomy 32:4.) Jehovah’s righteous anger
against Nineveh simply abated. He observed the
change in those people and saw that the punishment
he had intended to bring on them would no longer
be ?tting. This was an occasion to show divine
mercy.
11

Jehovah is nothing like the rigid, cold, even
harsh God so often portrayed by religious leaders.
On the contrary, he is reasonable, adaptable, and
12

merciful. When he determines to bring punishment
on the wicked, he ?rst uses his representatives on
earth to issue warnings, for he is eager to see
the wicked do what the Ninevites did—repent and
change their ways. (Ezek. 33:11) Jehovah told his
12, 13. (a) How does Jehovah show that he is reasonable, adaptable,
and merciful? (b) Why was Jonah’s prophecy not a false one?
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

207

prophet Jeremiah: “At any moment that I may speak
against a nation and against a kingdom to uproot it
and to pull it down and to destroy it, and that nation actually turns back from its badness against
which I spoke, I will also feel regret over the calamity that I had thought to execute upon it.”—Jer. 18:
7, 8.
13

Was Jonah’s prophecy a false one? No; it ful-

?lled its purpose as a warning. That warning was
based on the Ninevites’ bad ways, which subsequently changed. Should the Ninevites resume their
wicked ways, God would bring the same judgment
against them. That is exactly what happened later
on.—Zeph. 2:13-15.
14

How did Jonah react when destruction did not

come at the time he expected it to? We read: “To Jonah, though, it was highly displeasing, and he got to
be hot with anger.” (Jonah 4:1) Jonah even uttered
a prayer that sounds like a rebuke of the Almighty!
Jonah suggested that he should have stayed home,
on his own ground. He claimed that he knew all
14. How did Jonah react to Jehovah’s mercy on Nineveh?
208

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

along that Jehovah would not bring calamity on Nineveh, even using that as an excuse for his running
away to Tarshish in the ?rst place. Then he asked to
die, saying that death would be better than life.
—Read Jonah 4:2, 3.
What was troubling Jonah? We cannot know all
that went through his mind, but we do know that
Jonah had proclaimed doom to Nineveh before all
those people. They had believed him. And now, no
doom was coming. Did he fear being ridiculed or being labeled a false prophet? Whatever the case, he
did not rejoice over the people’s repentance or over
Jehovah’s mercy. Instead, it seems, he was on a
15

downward spiral into a mire of bitterness, self-pity,
and wounded pride. Evidently, though, Jonah’s merciful God still saw good in this distressed prophet.
Instead of punishing Jonah for his disrespect, Jehovah simply asked him one gentle, probing question:
“Have you rightly become hot with anger?” (Jonah
4:4) Did Jonah even answer? The Bible record is silent.
15. (a) What may have led Jonah into a downward spiral? (b) How did
Jehovah deal with his distressed prophet?
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

209

16

It is easy to judge Jonah for his conduct, but we

do well to remember that it is not unusual for imperfect humans to disagree with God. Some may believe that Jehovah should have prevented a tragedy
or that he should have executed swift judgment
against the wicked or even that he should have
brought an end to this whole world system of things
before now. Jonah’s example serves to remind us
that when we disagree with Jehovah God, it is always our own point of view that needs an adjustment—never His.
17

How Jehovah Taught Jonah a Lesson
The despondent prophet left Nineveh and head-

ed, not home, but eastward, where some mountains
overlooked the region. He built a little shelter and
settled in to wait—and to watch Nineveh. Perhaps
he still clung to the hope of witnessing her destruction. How would Jehovah teach this hardheaded
man to be merciful?
16. In what ways might some ?nd themselves disagreeing with God, and
what lesson can we learn from Jonah’s example?
17, 18. (a) What did Jonah do after leaving Nineveh? (b) How did Jehovah’s miracles involving a bottle-gourd plant a?ect Jonah?
210

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

Overnight, Jehovah caused a bottle-gourd plant
to sprout up. Jonah woke to see this luxuriant
growth, with its broad leaves providing far more
shade than his ?imsy shelter ever could. His spirits
lifted. “Jonah began to rejoice greatly” over the
plant, perhaps viewing its miraculous appearance as
a sign of God’s blessing and approval. However, Je18

hovah wanted to do more for Jonah than simply deliver him from the heat and from his own petulant
anger. He wanted to reach Jonah’s heart. So God
performed additional miracles. He sent a worm to
attack and kill the plant. Then he sent “a parching
east wind” until Jonah began “swooning away” because of the heat. The man’s spirits plummeted, and
again he asked God that he might die.—Jonah 4:6-8.
Once more Jehovah asked Jonah if he was rightly angry, this time over the death of the bottle-gourd
plant. Instead of repenting, Jonah justi?ed himself,
saying: “I have rightly become hot with anger, to the
point of death.” The stage was now set for Jehovah
to drive the lesson home.—Jonah 4:9.
19

19, 20. How did Jehovah reason with Jonah about the bottle-gourd
plant?
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

211

20

God reasoned with Jonah, saying that the proph-

et was feeling sorry over the death of a mere plant
that had sprung up overnight, one that Jonah neither planted nor caused to grow. Then God concluded: “For my part, ought I not to feel sorry for Nineveh the great city, in which there exist more than
one hundred and twenty thousand men who do not
at all know the di?erence between their right hand
and their left, besides many domestic animals?”—Jonah 4:10, 11.1
21

Do you see the depth of Jehovah’s object lesson?

Jonah had never done a thing to take care of that
plant. Jehovah, on the other hand, was the Source
of life for those Ninevites and had sustained them,
as he does all creatures on earth. How could Jonah
place more value on a single plant than he did on
the lives of 120,000 humans, in addition to all their
livestock? Was it not because Jonah had allowed his
thinking to become sel?sh? After all, he felt sorry
1 God’s saying that those people did not know right from left suggested their childlike ignorance of divine standards.

21. (a) What object lesson did Jehovah teach Jonah? (b) How may the
account about Jonah help us to take an honest look at ourselves?
212

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

for the plant only because it had bene?ted him personally. Did not his anger over Nineveh spring from
motives that were likewise sel?sh—a prideful desire
to save face, to be proved right? Jonah’s story may
help us to take an honest look at ourselves. Who of
us is immune to such sel?sh tendencies? How grateful we should be that Jehovah patiently teaches us
to be more sel?ess, more compassionate, more merciful—as he is!
22

The question is, Did Jonah take the lesson to

heart? The book bearing his name ends with Jehovah’s question hanging there—in e?ect, still echoing.
Some critics might complain that Jonah never answers. In truth, though, his answer is there. It is the
book itself. You see, evidence indicates that Jonah
wrote the book bearing his name. Just imagine that
prophet, once again safe in his homeland, writing
this account. We can almost picture an older, wiser,
humbler man ruefully shaking his head as he describes his own mistakes, his rebellion, and his
22. (a) How was Jonah evidently a?ected by Jehovah’s wise instruction about mercy? (b) What lesson do we all need to learn?
HE LEARNED A LESSON IN MERCY

213

stubborn refusal to show mercy. Clearly, Jonah did
learn a vital lesson from Jehovah’s wise instruction.
He learned to be merciful. Will we?—Read Matthew
5:7.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Jonah show faith and courage as he
preached in Nineveh?
? What can we learn from the Ninevites’
repentance?
? What can we learn from Jonah’s attitude
toward the repentance of the Ninevites?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Jonah when you receive corrective counsel?

214

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JONAH

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

She Stood Up for God’s People
ESTHER tried to calm her heart as she approached
the courtyard in the palace at Shushan. It was not
easy. Everything about the castle was designed to
inspire awe—its multicolored relief sculptures of
winged bulls, archers, and lions of glazed brickwork,
its ?uted stone columns and imposing statues, even
its position atop huge platforms near the snowcapped Zagros Mountains and overlooking the pure
waters of the river Choaspes. All of it was intended
to remind each visitor of the immense power of the
man whom Esther was going to see, the one who
called himself “the great king.” He was also her husband.
2 Husband! How di?erent Ahasuerus was from the
kind of husband any faithful Jewish girl might
have expected!1 He did not look to such examples
1 Ahasuerus is widely thought to have been Xerxes I, who ruled
the Persian Empire early in the ?fth century B.C.E.

1-3. (a) Why might Esther have felt intimidated by the prospect of approaching her husband? (b) We will discuss what questions regarding
Esther?
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

215

as Abraham, a man who humbly accepted God’s direction to listen to Sarah, his wife. (Gen. 21:12) The
king knew little or nothing of Esther’s God, Jehovah,
or of His Law. Ahasuerus knew Persian law, though,
including a law forbidding the very thing that Esther
was about to do. What was that? Well, the law said
that anyone who appeared before the Persian monarch without ?rst being summoned by the king was
liable to death. Esther had not been summoned, but
she was going to the king anyway. As she drew near
to the inner courtyard, where she would be visible
from the king’s throne, she may have felt that she
was walking to her death.—Read Esther 4:11; 5:1.
3

Why did she take such a risk? And what can we

learn from the faith of this remarkable woman?
First, let us see how Esther got into the unusual position of being a queen in Persia.
4

Esther’s Background
Esther was an orphan. We know very little of the

parents who named her Hadassah, a Hebrew word
for “myrtle,” a lovely white-blossomed shrub. When
4. What was Esther’s background, and how did she come to live with
her cousin Mordecai?
216

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

Esther’s parents died, one of her relatives, a kindly
man named Mordecai, took pity on the child. He
was her cousin, but Mordecai was much older. He
brought Esther into his home and treated her as his
own daughter.—Esther 2:5-7, 15.
5 Mordecai and Esther lived as Jewish exiles in
that Persian capital, where they probably had to deal
with a measure of disdain because of their religion
and the Law they tried to follow. But Esther surely
drew closer to her cousin as he taught her about Jehovah, the merciful God who had rescued His people from trouble many times in the past—and would
do so again. (Lev. 26:44, 45) Clearly, a loving and loyal bond grew between Esther and Mordecai.
6 Mordecai evidently worked as some kind of of?cial at the castle at Shushan, regularly sitting within its gate, along with other servants of the king. (Esther 2:19, 21; 3:3) How the young Esther passed her
time as she grew up, we can only guess, although it
seems safe to say that she took good care of her older cousin and his home, which was likely situated in
the humbler quarters across the river from the royal
5, 6. (a) How did Mordecai raise Esther? (b) What kind of life did Esther and Mordecai lead in Shushan?
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

217

castle. Perhaps she enjoyed going to the market in
Shushan, where goldsmiths, silversmiths, and other
merchants displayed their wares. Esther could not
have imagined that such luxuries would later become commonplace to her; she had no idea of the
future in store for her.
“B eautiful in Appearance”
7 One day, Shushan was buzzing with gossip about
turmoil in the household of the king. At a grand
feast, where Ahasuerus was entertaining his noblemen with sumptuous food and wine, the king decided to summon his beautiful queen, Vashti, who was
feasting separately with the women. But Vashti refused to come. Humiliated and enraged, the king
asked his advisers how Vashti should be punished.
The result? She was deposed as queen. The king’s
servants began searching throughout the land for
beautiful young virgins; from among them the king
would select a new queen.—Esther 1:1–2:4.
8

We may imagine Mordecai gazing fondly at Es-

7. Why was Vashti deposed as queen, and what was the result?
8. (a) Why might Mordecai have felt some concern about Esther as she
grew up? (b) How do you think we might apply the Bible’s balanced
view of physical beauty? (See also Proverbs 31:30.)
218

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

ther from time to time and noting with a mixture of
pride and concern that his little cousin was grownup—and had turned out to be a remarkable beauty.
“The young woman was pretty in form and beautiful
in appearance,” we read. (Esther 2:7) The Bible presents a balanced view of physical beauty—it is delightful, but it needs to be coupled with wisdom and
humility. Otherwise, it may breed vanity, pride, and
other ugly traits of the heart. (Read Proverbs 11:22.)
Have you ever seen that to be true? In Esther’s case,
what would beauty turn out to be—an asset or a liability? Time would tell.
The king’s servants noticed Esther. They gathered her up in their search, taking her away from
Mordecai and o? to the grand palace across the river. (Esther 2:8) It must have been a di?cult parting,
for the two were like father and daughter. Mordecai
would not have wanted his adopted daughter to marry any unbeliever, even a king, but events were out of
his control.1 How eagerly Esther must have listened
9

1 See the box “Questions About Esther,” in Chapter 16.

9. (a) What happened when the king’s servants noticed Esther, and why
must her parting from Mordecai have been di?cult? (b) Why did Mordecai allow Esther to marry a pagan unbeliever? (Include the box.)
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

219

to Mordecai’s words of advice before she was taken
away! As she was led to Shushan the castle, her mind
was ?lled with questions. What kind of life lay ahead
of her?
She Won Favor “in the Eyes of Everyone S eeing Her”
10 Esther found herself ushered into a world that
was entirely new and strange to her. She was among
“many young women” who had been gathered from
far and wide in the Persian Empire. Their customs,
languages, and attitudes must have varied greatly.
Placed under the charge of an o?cial named Hegai,
the young women were to undergo an extensive beauty treatment, a yearlong program that included massages with fragrant oils. (Esther 2:8, 12) Such an environment and lifestyle might easily have bred an
obsession with personal appearance among those
young women, along with vanity and competitiveness. How was Esther a?ected?
11

No one on earth could have been more con-

cerned about Esther than Mordecai was. We read
that day by day, he made his way as near as he could
10, 11. (a) How might Esther’s new environment easily have a?ected
her? (b) How did Mordecai show his concern for Esther’s welfare?
220

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

to the house of the women and endeavored to learn
of Esther’s welfare. (Esther 2:11) As bits of information trickled out to him, perhaps through cooperative servants in the household, he must have beamed
with fatherly pride. Why?
12

Esther so impressed Hegai that he treated her

with great loving-kindness, giving her seven servant
girls and the best place in the house of the women.
The account even says: “All the while Esther was
continually gaining favor in the eyes of everyone seeing her.” (Esther 2:9, 15) Would beauty alone have
impressed everyone so profoundly? No, there was
much more to Esther than that.
13

For instance, we read: “Esther had not told

about her people or about her relatives, for Mordecai himself had laid the command upon her that she
should not tell.” (Esther 2:10) Mordecai had instructed the girl to be discreet about her Jewish heritage; he no doubt saw that among Persian royalty,
there was much prejudice against his people. What
12, 13. (a) What impression did Esther make on those around her?
(b) Why would Mordecai have been pleased to learn that Esther had
not revealed her Jewish heritage?
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

221

a pleasure it was for him to learn that now, even
though Esther was out of his sight, she still showed
the same wise and obedient spirit!
14

Young people today can likewise bring joy to the

hearts of parents and guardians. When out of their
parents’ sight—even if surrounded by people who
are shallow, immoral, or vicious—they can resist bad
in?uences and stick to the standards that they know
are right. When they do so, like Esther, they make
the heart of their heavenly Father rejoice.—Read
Proverbs 27:11.
15

When the time came for Esther to be presented

to the king, she was given the liberty to select any
items that she thought she might need, perhaps to
beautify herself further. Modestly, though, she asked
for nothing beyond what Hegai mentioned to her.
(Esther 2:15) She probably realized that beauty alone
would not win the king’s heart; a modest and humble spirit would prove a far rarer commodity in that
court. Was she right?
14. How can young people today imitate Esther’s example?
15, 16. (a) How did Esther win the king’s love? (b) Why might the
changes in Esther’s life have been challenging?
222

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

The account answers: “The king came to love Esther more than all the other women, so that she
gained more favor and loving-kindness before him
than all the other virgins. And he proceeded to put
the royal headdress upon her head and make her
queen instead of Vashti.” (Esther 2:17) It must have
been hard for this humble Jewish girl to adjust to
the change in her life—she was the new queen, wife
to the most powerful monarch on earth at that time!
Did her new position go to her head, ?lling her with
pride? Far from it!
17 Esther remained obedient to her adoptive father,
Mordecai. She kept her connection to the Jewish
people a secret. Further, when Mordecai uncovered
a plot to assassinate Ahasuerus, Esther obediently
passed his warning along to the king, and the plotters were foiled. (Esther 2:20-23) She still expressed
faith in her God by showing a humble, obedient spirit. How we need Esther’s example today, when obedience is rarely valued as a virtue and when disobedience and rebellion are the norm! But people of
genuine faith treasure obedience, as Esther did.
16

17. (a) In what ways did Esther remain obedient to her adoptive father? (b) Why is Esther’s example an important one for us today?
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

223

Esther’s Faith Under Test
18 A man named Haman rose to prominence in the
court of Ahasuerus. The king appointed him prime
minister, making Haman his principal adviser and the
second in command in the empire. The king even decreed that all who saw this o?cial must bow down to
him. (Esther 3:1-4) For Mordecai, that law posed a
problem. He believed in obeying the king but not at
the cost of disrespecting God. You see, Haman was an
Agagite. That evidently means that he was a descendant of Agag, the Amalekite king who was executed
by God’s prophet Samuel. (1 Sam. 15:33) So wicked
were the Amalekites that they had made themselves
enemies of Jehovah and Israel. As a people, the Amalekites stood condemned by God.1 (Deut. 25:19) How
could a faithful Jew bow down to an Amalekite? Mordecai could not. He stood his ground. To this day,
men and women of faith have risked their lives to ad1 Haman may have been among the very last of the Amalekites,
since “the remnant” of them had been destroyed back in the days
of King Hezekiah.—1 Chron. 4:43.

18. (a) Why might Mordecai have refused to bow down to Haman?
(See also footnote.) (b) How do men and women of faith today imitate
the example of Mordecai?
224

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

here to this principle: “We must obey God as ruler
rather than men.”—Acts 5:29.
Haman was enraged. But it was not enough for
him to ?nd a way to kill o? Mordecai. He wanted to
exterminate all of Mordecai’s people! Haman persuaded the king by painting a dark portrait of the Jews.
Without naming them, he implied that they were
inconsequential, a people “scattered and separated
among the peoples.” Even worse, he said that they did
not obey the king’s laws; hence, they were dangerous
rebels. He proposed to donate to the king’s treasury
an immense sum of money to cover the expense of
slaughtering all the Jews in the empire.1 Ahasuerus
gave Haman the king’s own signet ring to seal any order that he had in mind.—Esther 3:5-10.
19

20

Soon messengers were speeding on horseback to

1 Haman o?ered 10,000 silver talents, worth hundreds of millions
of dollars today. If Ahasuerus was Xerxes I, the money might have
made Haman’s o?er more appealing. Xerxes needed a vast store of
funds to carry out his long-proposed but ultimately disastrous war
against Greece.

19. What did Haman want to do, and how did he go about persuading
the king?
20, 21. (a) How did Haman’s proclamation a?ect the Jews throughout
the Persian Empire, including Mordecai? (b) What did Mordecai implore Esther to do?
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

225

every corner of the vast empire, delivering what
amounted to a death sentence on the Jewish people.
Imagine the impact of such a proclamation when it
reached far-o? Jerusalem, where a remnant of Jews
who had returned from exile in Babylon were struggling to rebuild a city that still had no wall to defend
it. Perhaps Mordecai thought of them, as well as of
his own friends and relatives in Shushan, when he
heard the terrible news. Distraught, he ripped his
clothes, wore sackcloth and placed ashes on his head,
and cried aloud in the middle of the city. Haman,
however, sat drinking with the king, unmoved by the
grief he had stirred up among the many Jews and
their friends in Shushan.—Read Esther 3:12–4:1.
21

Mordecai knew that he had to act. But what

could he do? Esther heard of his distress and sent
clothes to him, but Mordecai refused to take comfort. Maybe he had long wondered why his God, Jehovah, had allowed dear Esther to be taken from
him and made the queen of a pagan ruler. Now the
reason seemed to be emerging. Mordecai sent a message to the queen, imploring Esther to intercede
226

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

with the king, to stand up “for her own people.”
—Esther 4:4-8.
22 Esther’s heart must have sunk when she heard
that message. Here was her greatest test of faith. She
was afraid, as she freely revealed in her reply to Mordecai. She reminded him of the king’s law. To appear
before the king unsummoned meant a death sentence. Only if the king held out his golden scepter
was the o?ender spared. And did Esther have any
reason to expect such clemency, especially in view of
Vashti’s fate when she had refused the king’s command to appear? Esther told Mordecai that the king
had not invited her to see him in 30 days! Such neglect left her plenty of reason to wonder if she had
fallen out of favor with this capricious monarch.1
—Esther 4:9-11.
1 Xerxes I was known for his mercurial, violent temper. The
Greek historian Herodotus recorded some examples from Xerxes’
war against Greece. The king ordered that a pontoon bridge of
ships be built across the strait of Hellespont. When a storm ruined
the bridge, Xerxes ordered the engineers beheaded and even had his
men “punish” the Hellespont by whipping the water while an insulting proclamation was read aloud. In the same campaign, when
a wealthy man begged that his son be excused from joining the
army, Xerxes had the son cut in half, his body displayed as a warning.

22. Why was Esther afraid to appear before her husband the king? (See
also footnote.)
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

227

23

Mordecai replied ?rmly to bolster Esther’s faith.

He assured her that if she failed to act, salvation for
the Jews would arise from some other source. But
how could she expect to be spared once the persecution gathered force? Here Mordecai showed his
profound faith in Jehovah, who would never let His
people be exterminated and His promises go unful?lled. (Josh. 23:14) Then Mordecai asked Esther:
“Who is there knowing whether it is for a time like
this that you have attained to royal dignity?” (Esther
4:12-14) Is not Mordecai worthy of imitation? He
trusted completely in his God, Jehovah. Do we?
—Prov. 3:5, 6.
24

A Faith Stronger Than the Fear of Death
For Esther, the time of decision had arrived. She

asked Mordecai to get her countrymen to join her in
a three-day fast, concluding her message with a statement that resonates down to this day in its simple
faith and courage: “In case I must perish, I must perish.” (Esther 4:15-17) She must have prayed more fer23. (a) What did Mordecai say to bolster Esther’s faith? (b) Why is
Mordecai worthy of imitation?
24. How did Esther show faith and courage?
228

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

vently in those three days than she ever had in her
life. Finally, though, the moment came. She dressed
in her very best royal ?nery, doing all she could to
appeal to the king. Then she went.
As described at the outset of this chapter, Esther
made her way to the king’s court. We can only imagine the anxious thoughts and fervent prayers ?lling
her mind and heart. She entered the courtyard,
where she could see Ahasuerus on his throne. Perhaps she tried to read the expression on his face
—the face that was framed by the carefully tended,
symmetrical curls of his hair and of his squared
beard. If she had to wait, it must have felt like an
eternity. But the moment passed—her husband saw
her. He was surely surprised, but his expression softened. He held out his golden scepter!—Esther 5:1, 2.
25

Esther had gained an audience, a hearing ear.
She had taken a stand for her God and for her
people, setting a beautiful example of faith for
all servants of God down through time. True
26

25. Describe how events unfolded as Esther appeared before her husband.
26. Why do true Christians need courage like Esther’s, and why was
her work only beginning?
SHE STOOD UP FOR GOD’S PEOPLE

229

Christians today cherish such examples. Jesus said
that his genuine followers would be marked by selfsacri?cing love. (Read John 13:34, 35.) Showing such
love often requires courage like Esther’s. But even
after Esther stood up for God’s people that day, her
work was only beginning. How would she convince
the king that his favorite adviser, Haman, was a
wicked schemer? How could she help to save her
people? We will consider these questions in the following chapter.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Esther show that she was humble and
obedient?
? How did Mordecai help Esther to act
faithfully?
? What actions reveal Esther’s courage?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Esther?

230

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

She Acted Wisely, Bravely, and Selflessly
ESTHER slowly approached the throne, her heart
racing. Imagine a hush falling over the great royal
chamber in the Persian palace of Shushan, a silence
so profound that Esther could hear her own soft
footsteps and the rustling of her royal garments. She
could not let her attention wander to the grandeur of
the royal court, the graceful columns, the richly
carved ceiling of cedars imported from distant Lebanon. She trained all her attention on the man seated
on the throne, the man who held her life in his hands.
The king watched intently as Esther approached,
extending his golden scepter toward her. It was a
simple gesture, but it meant Esther’s life, for by it
the king excused her from the o?ense she had just
committed—that of appearing before him without a
royal invitation. As she came to the throne, Esther
reached out and gratefully touched the top of the
scepter.—Esther 5:1, 2.
2

1-3. (a) What was it like for Esther to approach her husband’s throne?
(b) How did the king respond to Esther’s visit?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

231

Everything about King Ahasuerus bespoke his
immense wealth and power. The royal garb of the
Persian monarchs of those times reputedly cost the
equivalent of hundreds of millions of dollars. Yet,
Esther could see some warmth in her husband’s eyes;
in his own way, he did love her. He said: “What do
you have, O Esther the queen, and what is your request? To the half of the kingship—let it even be given to you!”—Esther 5:3.
3

Esther had already shown remarkable faith and
courage; she had come before the king to protect her
people from a plot to wipe them all out. So far, she
had met with success, but greater challenges lay
ahead. She had to convince this proud monarch that
his most trusted adviser was a wicked man who
had duped him into condemning Esther’s people to
death. How would she persuade him, and what can
we learn from her faith?
4

She Wisely Chose “a T ime to Speak”
5 Should Esther have revealed to the king the
whole problem in front of his court? Doing so might
4. What challenges lay ahead of Esther?
5, 6. (a) How did Esther apply the principle found at Ecclesiastes 3:
1, 7? (b) How did Esther’s way of approaching her husband prove wise?
232

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

have humiliated him and given his adviser Haman
time to dispute her charges. So, what did Esther do?
Centuries earlier, wise King Solomon was inspired to
write: “For everything there is an appointed time, . . .
a time to keep quiet and a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:
1, 7) We may imagine Esther’s adoptive father, the
faithful man Mordecai, teaching the young woman
such principles as she grew up under his care. Esther certainly understood the importance of choosing carefully the “time to speak.”
6

Esther said: “If to the king it does seem good, let

the king with Haman come today to the banquet that
I have made for him.” (Esther 5:4) The king agreed
and had Haman summoned. Can you see how wisely Esther spoke? She preserved her husband’s dignity and created a more suitable setting for revealing
her concerns to him.—Read Proverbs 10:19.
7

No doubt Esther prepared that feast careful-

ly, seeing to it that in every detail she catered to
her husband’s preferences. The banquet included
?ne wine to encourage a happy mood. (Ps. 104:15)
7, 8. What was Esther’s ?rst banquet like, yet why did she delay in
speaking up to the king?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

233

Questions About Esther
Why did Mordecai allow Esther to marry a pagan unbeliever?
There is no basis for the suggestion of some scholars
that Mordecai was an opportunist who wanted Esther
to wed the king for the sake of prestige. As a faithful Jew, he would not have favored such a marriage.
(Deut. 7:3) Ancient Jewish tradition holds that Mordecai tried to prevent the marriage. It seems unlikely that
either he or Esther, mere foreigners in a land ruled by
an autocrat who held a godlike status, would have had
much choice in the matter. In time, it became clear
that Jehovah used Esther’s marriage as a means of protecting his people.—Esther 4:14.
Why does the book of Esther contain no mention of God’s
personal name, Jehovah?
Mordecai was evidently the inspired writer of the
book. Perhaps the book was at ?rst kept with o?cial
Persian records before it was taken to Jerusalem. The
use of Jehovah’s name might have moved worshippers
of the Persian gods to destroy the book. In any case, Jehovah’s involvement in the story is clear. Interestingly,
God’s personal name is contained in the original Hebrew text by means of acrostics, wherein the phrasing
appears to have been arranged deliberately so that the
?rst or the last letters of successive words spell out
God’s name.—Esther 1:20, ftn.
234

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

Is the book of Esther historically inaccurate?
Critics level that charge against the book. However,
some scholars have noted that the writer of the book
showed a remarkably detailed knowledge of Persian
royalty, architecture, and customs. True, no mention of
Queen Esther has been found in surviving secular documents, but Esther would hardly be the only royal personage who was erased from public records. What is
more, secular records do show that a man named Mardukâ, a Persian equivalent of Mordecai, served as a
court o?cial in Shushan at the time described in the
book.

Ahasuerus enjoyed himself, and he was moved to ask
Esther again what her petition might be. Was this
now the time to speak?
8

Esther thought not. Rather, she invited the king

and Haman to come to a second banquet, on the following day. (Esther 5:7, 8) Why did she delay? Remember, all of Esther’s people were facing death by
the king’s decree. With so much at stake, Esther had
to be sure that the time was right. So she waited,
creating yet another opportunity to show her husband how highly she regarded him.
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

235

9

Patience is a rare and precious quality. Though

distressed and eager to speak her mind, Esther patiently waited for the right moment. We can learn
much from her example, for all of us have likely seen
wrongs that need to be put right. If we seek to convince someone in authority to address a problem, we
may need to imitate Esther and be patient. Proverbs
25:15 says: “By patience a commander is induced,
and a mild tongue itself can break a bone.” If we wait
patiently for the right moment and speak mildly, as
Esther did, even opposition as hard as bone may be
broken. Did Esther’s God, Jehovah, bless her patience and wisdom?
10

Patience Paves the Way for Justice
Esther’s patience paved the way for a remarkable

chain of events. Haman left the ?rst banquet in high
spirits, “joyful and merry of heart” that the king and
queen favored him so. As Haman passed through the
castle gate, though, his eyes fell on Mordecai, that
9. What is the value of patience, and how can we imitate Esther’s example in this regard?
10, 11. Why did Haman’s mood change after he left the ?rst banquet,
and what did his wife and friends urge him to do?
236

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

Jew who still refused to pay him special homage. As
we noted in the preceding chapter, Mordecai’s reasons had nothing to do with disrespect but, rather,
with his conscience and his relationship with Jehovah God. Yet, Haman “was immediately ?lled with
rage.”—Esther 5:9.
11

When Haman told his wife and friends of this

slight, they urged him to prepare a huge stake, over
72 feet tall, and then to ask the king’s permission to
hang Mordecai on it. Haman liked their idea and immediately set about the task.—Esther 5:12-14.
12

Meanwhile, the king had an unusual night. “The

king’s sleep ?ed,” the Bible tells us, so he had the of?cial records of State read aloud to him. The reading
included the report of an assassination plot against
Ahasuerus. He remembered the a?air; the would-be
murderers were caught and executed. What, though,
about the man who had exposed the plot—Mordecai? Suddenly alert, the king asked how Mordecai
had been rewarded. The answer? Nothing at all had
been done for the man.—Read Esther 6:1-3.
12. Why did the king have the o?cial records of State read aloud to
him, and what did he learn as a result?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

237

Agitated, the king asked what court o?cials were
available to help him correct this oversight. Of all
people, Haman was in the king’s court—early, it
seems, because he was eager to secure permission to
execute Mordecai. But before Haman could make his
request, the king asked him how best to honor a man
who had won the king’s favor. Haman assumed that
the king had him in mind. So Haman devised a lavish honor: Clothe the man in royal garb, and have a
high o?cial parade him around Shushan on the
king’s own horse, calling out the man’s praises for
all to hear. Imagine the expression on Haman’s face
when he learned that the man to be honored was
Mordecai! And whom did the king assign to sing out
Mordecai’s praises? Haman!—Esther 6:4-10.
14 Haman grudgingly carried out what to him was
an odious duty and then rushed home in distress.
His wife and friends said that this turn of events
could only bode ill; he was bound to fail in his ?ght
against Mordecai the Jew.—Esther 6:12, 13.
15 Because Esther was patient, waiting that one ex13

13, 14. (a) How did things start to go wrong for Haman? (b) What did
Haman’s wife and friends tell him?
15. (a) What good came of Esther’s patience? (b) Why is it wise for
us to show “a waiting attitude”?
238

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

tra day to present her request to the king, Haman
was given time to lay the basis for his own downfall.
And might not Jehovah God have been behind the
king’s sleeplessness? (Prov. 21:1) Little wonder that
God’s Word encourages us to show “a waiting attitude”! (Read Micah 7:7.) When we wait on God, we
may ?nd that his solutions to our problems far exceed anything that we might have devised ourselves.
16

She Spoke Up Bravely
Esther dared not test the king’s patience any fur-

ther; at her second banquet, she had to tell all. But
how? As it turned out, the king gave her the opportunity, asking again what her petition might be. (Esther 7:2) Esther’s “time to speak” had come.
17

We may imagine Esther saying a silent prayer to

her God before uttering these words: “If I have
found favor in your eyes, O king, and if to the king
it does seem good, let there be given me my own soul
at my petition and my people at my request.” (Esther 7:3) Notice that she assured the king that she
respected his judgment regarding what seemed good.
16, 17. (a) When did Esther’s “time to speak” come? (b) How did Esther di?er from Vashti, the king’s former wife?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

239

How Esther di?ered from Vashti, the king’s former
wife, who had purposely humiliated her husband!
(Esther 1:10-12) Further, Esther did not criticize the
king for his folly of trusting in Haman. Rather, she
begged the king to protect her from a danger to her
own life.
18

That request surely moved and amazed the king.

Who would dare endanger his queen? Esther went
on: “We have been sold, I and my people, to be annihilated, killed and destroyed. Now if we had been
sold for mere men slaves and for mere maidservants,
I should have kept silent. But the distress is not appropriate when with damage to the king.” (Esther
7:4) Note that Esther frankly exposed the problem,
yet she added that she would have kept quiet about
it if mere slavery had been the threat. This genocide,
though, would be too costly to the king himself to
keep quiet about it.
19

Esther’s example teaches us much about the art

of persuasion. If you ever need to lay bare a serious
18. How did Esther reveal the problem to the king?
19. What can we learn from Esther about the art of persuasion?
240

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

A Prophecy Fulfilled
In ?ghting for God’s people, Esther and Mordecai
ful?lled an ancient Bible prophecy. Over a dozen centuries earlier, Jehovah inspired the patriarch Jacob to
foretell regarding one of his sons: “Benjamin will
keep on tearing like a wolf. In the morning he will eat
the animal seized and at evening he will divide spoil.”
(Gen. 49:27) In “the morning” of Israel’s kingly history, Benjamin’s descendants included King Saul and
other mighty warriors for Jehovah’s people. In the
“evening” of that royal history, after the sun had set
on Israel’s kingly line, Esther and Mordecai, both of
the tribe of Benjamin, warred e?ectively against Jehovah’s enemies. In a sense, they also divided spoil, in
that Haman’s vast estate went to them.

problem to a loved one or even to a person in authority, a combination of patience, respect, and candor can be of great help.—Prov. 16:21, 23.
20

Ahasuerus demanded: “Who is this, and just

where is the one who has emboldened himself to do
that way?” Imagine Esther pointing a ?nger as she
20, 21. (a) How did Esther expose Haman, eliciting what reaction
from the king? (b) How did Haman act when exposed as a scheming
coward?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

241

said: “The man, the adversary and enemy, is this bad
Haman.” The accusation hung in the air. Terror
?lled Haman. Picture the volatile monarch’s face coloring as he realized that his trusted adviser had
duped him into signing an order that would destroy
his own beloved wife! The king stormed out into the
garden to regain his composure.—Esther 7:5-7.
21

Haman, exposed as the scheming coward that he

was, groveled at the queen’s feet. When the king
came back into the room and saw Haman on Esther’s couch pleading with her, he angrily accused
Haman of attempting to rape the queen in the king’s
own home. That sounded the death knell for Haman.
He was taken away, his face covered. One of the
king’s o?cials then spoke up, telling the king of the
huge stake that Haman had intended for Mordecai.
Ahasuerus immediately ordered that Haman himself
be hanged on it.—Esther 7:8-10.
22

In today’s unjust world, it is easy to imagine that

we will never see justice done. Have you ever felt
that way? Esther never despaired, never turned cyn22. How can Esther’s example teach us never to despair, turn cynical,
or lose faith?
242

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

ical, never lost faith. When the time came, she spoke
up bravely for what was right, and she trusted in Jehovah to do the rest. Let us do the same! Jehovah
has not changed since Esther’s day. He is still more
than able to catch the wicked and cunning in their
own traps, just as he did Haman.—Read Psalm 7:
11-16.

23

She Acted Unsel?shly
for Jehovah and for His People
At last, the king learned who Mordecai was—not

only his loyal protector against assassination but
also the adoptive father of Esther. Ahasuerus bestowed Haman’s position as prime minister on Mordecai. Haman’s house—including his immense fortune—the king gave to Esther, who placed Mordecai
over it.—Esther 8:1, 2.
24

Now that Esther and Mordecai were safe, could

the queen relax? Only if she were sel?sh. At that moment, Haman’s decree to kill all the Jews was making
23. (a) How did the king reward Mordecai and Esther? (b) How was
Jacob’s deathbed prophecy over B enjamin ful?lled? (See the box “A
Prophecy Ful?lled.”)
24, 25. (a) Why could Esther not relax after Haman’s plot was exposed? (b) How did Esther risk her life once more?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

243

its way to every corner of the empire. Haman had
cast lots, or Pur—evidently a form of spiritism—to
determine the opportune time to carry out this
vicious attack. (Esther 9:24-26) The day was yet
months away, but it was fast approaching. Could disaster still be averted?
25

Esther unsel?shly risked her life again, appear-

ing before the king once more without an o?cial invitation. This time, she wept for her people, pleading with her husband to revoke the terrible edict. But
laws passed in the Persian monarch’s name could not
be revoked. (Dan. 6:12, 15) So the king empowered
Esther and Mordecai to enact a new law. A second
proclamation was sent out, giving the Jews the right
to defend themselves. Riders sped to every part of
the empire, taking this good news to the Jews. Hope
was kindled anew in many hearts. (Esther 8:3-16) We
may imagine the Jews throughout that vast empire
arming themselves and preparing for battle, which
they could never have done without that new edict.
More important, though, would “Jehovah of armies”
be with his people?—1 Sam. 17:45.
244

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

26

When the chosen day ?nally came, God’s people

were ready. Even many Persian o?cials were on their
side now, as news had traveled far and wide about
the new prime minister, Mordecai the Jew. Jehovah
gave his people a great victory. He no doubt protected his people from terrible reprisals by handing their
enemies a thorough defeat.1—Esther 9:1-6.
27

Furthermore, Mordecai would never be safe to

preside over Haman’s house while the ten sons of
that evil man still lived. They too were killed. (Esther 9:7-10) A Bible prophecy was thus ful?lled, for
God had earlier foretold the complete destruction of
the Amalekites, who had proved to be wicked enemies of his people. (Deut. 25:17-19) The sons of Haman may well have been among the very last of that
condemned nation.
1 The king allowed the Jews a second day to ?nish their conquest of their enemies. (Esther 9:12-14) Even today, the Jews
commemorate that victory each year in the month of Adar, which
corresponds to late February and early March. The festival is
called Purim, named after the lots that Haman cast in his quest to
destroy Israel.

26, 27. (a) How great and how thorough was the victory that Jehovah
gave his people over their enemies? (b) What prophecy was ful?lled by
the destruction of Haman’s sons?
SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

245

Esther had to take on her young shoulders her
share of very heavy burdens—such as royal edicts involving war and execution. It could not have been
easy. But Jehovah’s will required that his people be
protected from destruction; the nation of Israel was
to produce the promised Messiah, the one source of
hope for all mankind! (Gen. 22:18) Servants of God
today are delighted to know that when the Messiah,
Jesus, came to the earth, he forbade his followers
from that time forward to take part in physical warfare.—Matt. 26:52.
28

Nonetheless, Christians do engage in spiritual
warfare; Satan is ever more eager to destroy our
faith in Jehovah God. (Read 2 Corinthians 10:3, 4.)
What a blessing to have Esther as an example! Like
her, may we show faith by our wise and patient use
of persuasion, by our courage, and by our unsel?sh
willingness to stand up for God’s people.
29

28, 29. (a) Why was it Jehovah’s will for Esther and her people to be
involved in warfare? (b) Why is Esther’s example a blessing for us today?

246

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  ESTHER

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Esther show wisdom in choosing “a
time to speak”?
? Esther’s patience led to what blessings?
? How did Esther prove to be brave and sel?ess
in defending her people?
? In what ways are you determined to imitate the
faith of Esther?

SHE ACTED WISELY, BRAVELY, AND SELFLESSLY

247

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

“Look! Jehovah’s Slave Girl!”
MARY looked up, wide-eyed, as the visitor entered
her home. He did not ask for her father or her mother. He was there to see her! He could not be from
Nazareth; of that she was sure. In a small town like
hers, strangers stood out. This one would stand out
anywhere. He addressed Mary in a way that was altogether new to her, saying: “Good day, highly favored one, Jehovah is with you.”—Read Luke 1:26-28.
2

Thus the Bible introduces us to Mary, daughter

of Heli, of the town of Nazareth in Galilee. We meet
her at a crossroads, in a sense. She was engaged to
marry the carpenter Joseph who was, not a man of
wealth, but a man of faith. So her course may have
seemed to lie neatly mapped out before her—a simple life of working supportively as the wife of Joseph, raising a family together with him. Suddenly,
though, she found herself faced with this visitor who
1, 2. (a) Mary received what greeting from a stranger? (b) In what way
was Mary at a crossroads?
248

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

brought her an assignment from her God, a responsibility that would change her life.
3

Many are surprised to learn that the Bible does

not tell us much about Mary. It says little of her
background, less of her personality, and nothing at
all of her appearance. Yet, what God’s Word does say
about her is revealing indeed.
4

In order to get acquainted with Mary, we need to

look beyond many preconceptions about her that are
promoted in various religions. So let us ignore the
countless “likenesses” executed in paint, marble, or
plaster. Let us ignore, too, the complex theology and
dogma that bestow on this humble woman such lofty
titles as “Mother of God” and “Queen of Heaven.”
Let us instead focus on what the Bible actually reveals. It gives us priceless insight into her faith and
how we can imitate it.
5

A Visit From an Angel
Mary’s visitor was no mere man. It was the

3, 4. In order to get acquainted with Mary, what do we need to ignore,
and on what do we need to focus?
5. (a) What can we learn about Mary from her reaction to Gabriel’s
greeting? (b) What vital lesson can we learn from Mary?
“LOOK! JEHOVAH’S SLAVE GIRL!”

249

angel Gabriel. When he called Mary “highly favored
one,” she was “deeply disturbed” by his words and
wondered about this unusual greeting. (Luke 1:29)
Highly favored by whom? Mary did not expect to be
highly favored among men. But the angel was speaking of the favor of Jehovah God. That mattered to
her. Still, she did not proudly presume that she had
God’s favor. If we strive for God’s favor, never
haughtily assuming that we already have it, we will
learn a vital lesson that young Mary fully understood. God opposes the haughty, but he loves and
supports the lowly and humble.—Jas. 4:6.
Mary would need such humility, for the angel
held out to her an almost unimaginable privilege. He
explained that she was to bear a child who would become the most important of all humans. Gabriel
said: “Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father, and he will rule as king over the house
of Jacob forever, and there will be no end of his kingdom.” (Luke 1:32, 33) Mary surely knew of the promise God had made to David more than one thousand
years earlier—namely, that one of his descendants
6

6. The angel held out what privilege to Mary?
250

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

would rule forever. (2 Sam. 7:12, 13) So her son
would be the Messiah whom God’s people over the
centuries had been hoping for!
What is more, the angel told her that her son
would “be called Son of the Most High.” How could
a human woman produce God’s Son? Really, how
could Mary produce a son at all? She was engaged
to Joseph but not yet married to him. This question
Mary put into frank words: “How is this to be, since
I am having no intercourse with a man?” (Luke 1:34)
Note that Mary spoke of her virginity without a
trace of shame. On the contrary, she treasured her
chastity. Today, many youths are eager to cast o?
their virginity and quick to ridicule those who do
not. The world has certainly changed. Jehovah, however, has not changed. (Mal. 3:6) As in Mary’s day,
he values those who adhere to his moral standards.
—Read Hebrews 13:4.
7

Although she was a faithful servant of God,
Mary was an imperfect human. How, then, could she
produce a perfect o?spring, the Son of God? Gabriel
8

7. (a) What did Mary’s question reveal about her? (b) What can young
people today learn from Mary?
8. How could Mary, though imperfect, produce a perfect o?spring?
“LOOK! JEHOVAH’S SLAVE GIRL!”

251

explained: “Holy spirit will come upon you, and power of the Most High will overshadow you. For that
reason also what is born will be called holy, God’s
Son.” (Luke 1:35) Holy means “clean,” “pure,” “sacred.” Normally, humans pass on their unclean, sinful state to their o?spring. In this case, though, Jehovah would perform a unique miracle. He would
transfer the life of his Son from heaven to the womb
of Mary and then use his active force, or holy spirit, to “overshadow” Mary, shielding the child from
any taint of sin. Did Mary believe the angel’s promise? How did she respond?
9

Mary’s Response to Gabriel
Skeptics, including some theologians of Christen-

dom, have a hard time believing that a virgin could
give birth. For all their education, they fail to grasp
a simple truth. As Gabriel put it, “with God no declaration will be an impossibility.” (Luke 1:37) Mary
accepted Gabriel’s words as truth, for she was a
young woman of great faith. However, that faith was
not gullibility. Like any reasoning person, Mary
9. (a) Why are skeptics wrong to doubt the account about Mary? (b) In
what way did Gabriel strengthen Mary’s faith?
252

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

needed evidence on which to base her faith. Gabriel
was prepared to add to her store of such evidence.
He told her about her elderly relative Elizabeth, long
known as a barren woman. God had miraculously enabled her to conceive!
10

Now what would Mary do? She had her assign-

ment before her and had evidence that God was
going to do all that Gabriel had said. We should not
assume that this privilege presented no fears, no
hardships. For one thing, she had her engagement to
Joseph to consider. Would their marriage proceed
when he found out about her pregnancy? For another thing, the assignment itself may have seemed a
daunting responsibility. She was to carry the life of
the most precious of all of God’s creatures—his own
beloved Son! She would have to care for him when
he was a helpless infant and protect him in a wicked world. A weighty responsibility indeed!
11

The Bible shows that even strong, faithful men

10. Why should we not assume that Mary’s privilege presented no fears
or hardships?
11, 12. (a) How have even strong, faithful men sometimes responded
to challenging assignments from God? (b) What did Mary reveal about
herself in her response to Gabriel?
“LOOK! JEHOVAH’S SLAVE GIRL!”

253

have sometimes hesitated to accept challenging assignments from God. Moses protested that he could
not speak ?uently enough to act as God’s spokesman. (Ex. 4:10) Jeremiah objected that he was “but
a boy,” too young to take on the task God had assigned him. (Jer. 1:6) And Jonah ran away from his
assignment! (Jonah 1:3) What about Mary?
12

Her words, so full of simple humility and obedi-

ence, resonate for all people of faith. She said to Gabriel: “Look! Jehovah’s slave girl! May it take place
with me according to your declaration.” (Luke 1:38)
A slave girl was the lowliest of servants; her life was
entirely in the hands of her master. That is how
Mary felt about her Master, Jehovah. She knew that
she was safe in his hands, that he is loyal to those
who are loyal to him, and that he would bless her as
she did her best with this challenging assignment.
—Ps. 18:25.
13

Sometimes God asks us to do what may seem

di?cult, even impossible, in our eyes. However, in
his Word he gives us ample reasons to trust him, to
13. If doing what God asks of us seems di?cult or even impossible,
how can we bene?t from Mary’s example?
254

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

place ourselves in his hands, as Mary did. (Prov. 3:
5, 6) Will we? If we do, he will reward us, giving us
reasons to build even stronger faith in him.
14

The Visit With Elizabeth
Gabriel’s words about Elizabeth meant a lot to

Mary. Of all the women in the world, who could understand her situation better? Mary hurried to the
mountainous country of Judah, a trip of perhaps
three or four days. As she entered the home of Elizabeth and Zechariah the priest, Jehovah rewarded
Mary with further solid evidence to bolster her faith.
Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting and immediately
felt the infant in her womb leap for joy. She was
?lled with holy spirit and spoke of Mary as “the
mother of my Lord.” God had revealed to Elizabeth
that Mary’s son would become her Lord, the Messiah. Further, she was inspired to commend Mary for
her faithful obedience, saying: “Happy too is she that
believed.” (Luke 1:39-45) Yes, everything that Jehovah had promised Mary would come true!
14, 15. (a) How did Jehovah reward Mary when she visited Elizabeth
and Zechariah? (b) What does Mary’s speech recorded at Luke 1:4655 reveal about her?
“LOOK! JEHOVAH’S SLAVE GIRL!”

255

15

In turn, Mary spoke. Her words are carefully

preserved in God’s Word. (Read Luke 1:46-55.) It is
by far Mary’s longest speech in the Bible record, and
it reveals much about her. It shows her thankful, appreciative spirit as she praises Jehovah for blessing
her with the privilege of serving as the mother of the
Messiah. It shows the depth of her faith as she
speaks of Jehovah as abasing the haughty and powerful and as helping the lowly and poor who seek to
serve him. It also hints at the extent of her knowledge. By one estimate, she made over 20 references
to the Hebrew Scriptures!1
16

Clearly, Mary thought deeply about God’s Word.

Still, she remained humble, preferring to let the
Scriptures do the talking rather than speaking of her
own originality. The son who was then growing in
her womb would one day show the same spirit, saying: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him
1 Among such references, Mary evidently quoted from the faithful
woman Hannah, who had also received a blessing from Jehovah in
the matter of childbirth.—See the box “Two Remarkable Prayers,”
in Chapter 6.

16, 17. (a) How did Mary and her son show a spirit that we need to
imitate? (b) Mary’s visit with Elizabeth reminds us of what blessing?
256

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

that sent me.” (John 7:16) We do well to ask ourselves: ‘Do I show such respect and reverence for
God’s Word? Or do I prefer my own ideas and teachings?’ Mary’s position is clear.
Mary remained with Elizabeth for about three
months, no doubt receiving and providing a great
deal of encouragement. (Luke 1:56) The Bible’s
warm account of this visit reminds us of what a
blessing friendship can be. If we seek out friends
who truly love our God, Jehovah, we are sure to
grow spiritually and draw closer to him. (Prov. 13:
20) Finally, though, it was time for Mary to return
home. What would Joseph say when he learned of
her condition?
17

Mary and Joseph
18 Mary likely did not wait for her pregnancy to reveal itself. She no doubt had to speak to Joseph. Beforehand, she may have wondered how this decent,
God-fearing man would respond to what she had to
tell him. Nonetheless, she approached him and told
him all that had happened to her. As you might
imagine, Joseph was deeply troubled. He wanted to
18. What did Mary reveal to Joseph, and how did he respond?
“LOOK! JEHOVAH’S SLAVE GIRL!”

257

believe this dear girl, but it seemed that she had
been unfaithful to him. The Bible does not say what
thoughts went through his mind or how he reasoned.
But it does say that he decided to divorce her, for at
that time, engaged couples were viewed as being
married. However, he did not want to expose her to
public shame and scandal, so he chose to divorce her
in secret. (Matt. 1:18, 19) It must have pained Mary
to see this kind man agonizing over this unprecedented situation. Yet, Mary was not embittered.
19

Jehovah kindly helped Joseph to ?nd the best

course. In a dream, God’s angel told him that Mary’s
pregnancy was indeed miraculous. That must have
been a relief! Joseph now did what Mary had done
from the start—he acted in harmony with Jehovah’s
leading. He took Mary as his wife, and he prepared
to take on the unique responsibility of caring for Jehovah’s Son.—Matt. 1:20-24.
20

Married people—and those contemplating mar-

riage—do well to learn from this young couple of
19. How did Jehovah help Joseph to follow the best course?
20, 21. What can married people and those contemplating marriage
learn from Mary and Joseph?
258

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

2,000 years ago. As Joseph saw his young wife ful?ll
the duties and cares of motherhood, he was surely
pleased that Jehovah’s angel had directed him. Joseph must have seen the importance of leaning on
Jehovah when making major decisions. (Ps. 37:5;
Prov. 18:13) He no doubt remained careful and kind
in making decisions as the family head.
21

On the other hand, what can we surmise from

Mary’s willingness to marry Joseph? Although at
?rst he may have found her story di?cult to comprehend, she waited on him to decide how to proceed,
for he was the man who would be the family head.
That certainly was a good lesson for her, as it is for
Christian women today. Finally, these incidents likely taught both Joseph and Mary much about the value of honest and open communication.—Read Proverbs 15:22.
22

That young couple certainly started their mar-

riage o? on the best of foundations. They both loved
Jehovah God above all and yearned to please him
as responsible, caring parents. Of course, greater
22. What was the foundation of Joseph and Mary’s marriage, and what
prospect lay before them?
“LOOK! JEHOVAH’S SLAVE GIRL!”

259

blessings awaited them—and greater challenges too.
Before them lay the prospect of raising Jesus, who
would grow up to be the greatest man the world has
ever known.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? What can we learn from Mary about humility?
? How was Mary’s obedience outstanding?
? In what ways did Mary strengthen her faith?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Mary?

260

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

She Drew “Conclusions in Her Heart”
MARY shifted her weight uncomfortably atop the
little beast of burden. She had been riding for hours.
Just ahead, Joseph walked steadily onward, leading
the way along the road toward distant Bethlehem.
Mary once again felt the stirring of life within her.
2

Mary was well along in her pregnancy; the Bible

describes her at this time with the expressive phrase
“heavy with child.” (Luke 2:5) As the couple passed
by one ?eld after another, perhaps some of the farmers looked up from their plowing or sowing and wondered why a woman in such a condition would go on
a journey. What had led Mary so far from her home
in Nazareth?
3

It all began months earlier when this young Jew-

ish woman received an assignment that was unique
in all human history. She was to give birth to the
1, 2. Describe Mary’s journey, and explain what made it uncomfortable for her.
3. What assignment had Mary received, and what will we seek to learn
about her?
SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

261

child who would become the Messiah, the Son of
God! (Luke 1:35) As the time to give birth approached, the need to take this journey arose. In the
process, Mary faced a number of challenges to her
faith. Let us see what helped her to stay spiritually
strong.
The Trip to B ethlehem
4 Joseph and Mary were not the only ones on the
move. Caesar Augustus had recently decreed that a
registration be carried out in the land, and people
had to travel to their town of origin in order to comply. How did Joseph respond? The account reads:
“Of course, Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of
the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to David’s city,
which is called Bethlehem, because of his being a
member of the house and family of David.”—Luke
2:1-4.
5

It was no coincidence that Caesar issued his de-

cree at this time. A prophecy written down some seven centuries earlier foretold that the Messiah would
be born in Bethlehem. Now, it so happened that
4, 5. (a) Why were Joseph and Mary heading to B ethlehem? (b) Caesar’s decree led to the ful?llment of what prophecy?
262

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

there was a town named Bethlehem a mere seven
miles from Nazareth. However, the prophecy speci?ed that it was “Bethlehem Ephrathah” that would
produce the Messiah. (Read Micah 5:2.) To reach that
little village from Nazareth, travelers covered some
80 hilly miles via Samaria. That was the Bethlehem
to which Joseph was summoned, for it was the ancestral home of the family of King David—the family to which both Joseph and his bride belonged.
6

Would Mary support Joseph in his decision to

comply? After all, the trip would be hard on her. It
was likely early in the autumn of the year, so light
rains were possible as the dry season gradually ended. What is more, the phrase “went up from Galilee”
is appropriate, for Bethlehem was perched at a lofty
altitude of over 2,500 feet—quite a climb, an arduous
end to a trek of several days. Perhaps it would take
longer than usual, for Mary’s condition might require numerous periods of rest. Now, of all times, a
young woman might yearn to stay close to home,
6, 7. (a) Why might a journey to B ethlehem have presented challenges
to Mary? (b) B eing the wife of Joseph made what di?erence in Mary’s
decisions? (See also footnote.)
SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

263

where she had family and friends who were ready to
help when her birth pangs began. Without a doubt,
she needed to have courage to take this trip.
Nonetheless, Luke writes that Joseph went “to
get registered with Mary.” He also notes that Mary
“had been given [to Joseph] in marriage as promised.” (Luke 2:4, 5) Being Joseph’s wife made a great
deal of di?erence in Mary’s decisions. She viewed her
husband as her spiritual head, embracing her Godgiven role as his helper by supporting him in his decisions.1 So she met this potential challenge to her
faith with simple obedience.
7

What else may have motivated Mary to obey? Did
she know of the prophecy about Bethlehem as the
birthplace of the Messiah? The Bible does not say.
We cannot rule out the possibility, for the fact was
evidently common knowledge among religious lead8

1 Note the contrast between this passage and the description of
an earlier trip: “Mary rose . . . and went” to visit Elizabeth. (Luke
1:39) At that time, as an engaged but unwed woman, Mary may
have acted without consulting Joseph. After the couple were married, the action of their trip together is ascribed to Joseph, not
Mary.

8. (a) What else may have motivated Mary to go to B ethlehem with
Joseph? (b) In what way is Mary’s example a beacon for faithful people?
264

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

ers and even people in general. (Matt. 2:1-7; John 7:
40-42) When it came to the Scriptures, Mary was far
from an ignorant girl. (Luke 1:46-55) At any rate,
whether Mary decided to travel in order to obey her
husband, a secular decree, or Jehovah’s own prophecy—or because of a combination of factors—she set
a splendid example. Jehovah greatly values a humble, obedient spirit in both men and women. In our
age, when submission often seems to be among the
most disregarded of virtues, Mary’s example stands
as a beacon for faithful people everywhere.
The Birth of Christ
Mary must have breathed a sigh of relief when
she ?rst caught sight of Bethlehem. As they mounted the hillsides, passing by olive groves—among the
last of the crops to be harvested—Mary and Joseph
may well have thought about the history of this little village. It was too insigni?cant to be numbered
among Judah’s cities, just as Micah the prophet had
said; yet it was the birthplace of Boaz, Naomi, and
later David, all more than a thousand years earlier.
9

9, 10. (a) What might Mary and Joseph have thought about while approaching B ethlehem? (b) Why did Joseph and Mary lodge where they
did?
SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

265

Mary and Joseph found the village to be crowded. Others had arrived to register before them, so
there was no space for them at the lodging room.1
They had no choice but to settle down for the night
in a stable. We can just imagine Joseph’s concern as
he saw his wife su?ering a sharp discomfort she had
never known, which then intensi?ed. Here, of all
places, her birth pangs had begun.
10

Women everywhere can empathize with Mary.
Some 4,000 years earlier, Jehovah had foretold that
it would be the common lot of women to su?er pain
during childbirth because of inherited sin. (Gen. 3:
16) There is no evidence to suggest that Mary was
any exception. Luke’s account draws a discreet curtain of privacy around the scene, saying simply: “She
gave birth to her son, the ?rstborn.” (Luke 2:7)
Yes, her “?rstborn” had arrived—the ?rst of Mary’s
many children, at least seven in all. (Mark 6:3) This
one, though, would ever stand apart. Not only was
he her ?rstborn but he was Jehovah’s own “?rstborn
11

1 It was the practice of the day for towns to provide a common
room to shelter travelers and passing caravans.

11. (a) Why can women everywhere empathize with Mary? (b) In what
ways was Jesus a “?rstborn”?
266

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

of all creation,” the only-begotten Son of God!—Col.
1:15.
12

It is at this point that the account adds a famous

detail: “She bound him with cloth bands and laid
him in a manger.” (Luke 2:7) Nativity plays, paintings, and scenes around the world sentimentalize
this setting. Consider, though, the reality. A manger
is a feeding trough, a bin from which farm animals
eat. Remember, the family was lodging in a stable,
hardly a place to be noted for good air or hygiene
—then or now. Really, what parents would choose
such a spot for childbirth if there were any other options? Most parents want the best for their children.
How much more so did Mary and Joseph want to
provide the best for the Son of God!
13

However, they did not let their limitations em-

bitter them; they simply did the best they could with
what they had. Notice, for instance, that Mary herself cared for the infant, wrapping him up snugly in
12. Where did Mary lay the baby, and how was the reality di?erent
from nativity plays, paintings, and scenes?
13. (a) In what way did Mary and Joseph do their best with what they
had? (b) How can wise parents today cultivate priorities similar to
those of Joseph and Mary?
SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

267

cloth bands, then laying him carefully in the manger
to sleep, ensuring that he would be warm and safe.
Mary was not about to let anxiety over her present
circumstances distract her from providing the best
that she could. She and Joseph both knew, too,
that caring spiritually for this child would be the
most important thing they could do for him. (Read
Deuteronomy 6:6-8.) Today, wise parents cultivate
similar priorities as they bring their children up in
this spiritually impoverished world.
14

A Visit Brings Encouragement
A sudden commotion disturbed the peaceful

scene. Shepherds rushed into the stable, eager to see
the family and the child in particular. These men
were bubbling over with excitement, their faces radiating joy. They had hurried in from the hillsides
where they were living with their ?ocks.1 They told
the wondering parents about a marvelous experience
1 That these shepherds at the time were living out-of-doors with
their ?ocks con?rms what Bible chronology indicates: The birth of
Christ did not occur in December when the ?ocks would have been
sheltered closer to home but, rather, sometime in early October.

14, 15. (a) Why were the shepherds eager to see the child? (b) What
did the shepherds do about what they had seen in the stable?
268

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

they had just had. On the hillside during the night
watch, an angel had suddenly appeared to them. Jehovah’s glory had gleamed all around, and the angel
told them that the Christ, or Messiah, had just been
born in Bethlehem. They would ?nd the child lying
in a manger, swaddled in cloth bands. Then, something even more spectacular happened—a mighty
host of angels appeared, praising God!—Luke 2:8-14.
15

No wonder these humble men came rushing into

Bethlehem! They must have been thrilled to see a
newborn infant lying there just as the angel had described. They did not keep this good news to themselves. “They made known the saying . . . And all
that heard marveled over the things told them by the
shepherds.” (Luke 2:17, 18) The religious leaders of
the day evidently looked down on shepherds. But Jehovah clearly valued these humble, faithful men.
How, though, did this visit a?ect Mary?
16

Mary was surely exhausted from the rigors of

childbirth, yet she listened intently to every word.
And she did more: “Mary began to preserve all these
16. How did Mary show that she truly was thoughtful, revealing what
key to her faith?
SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

269

sayings, drawing conclusions in her heart.” (Luke 2:
19) This young woman truly was thoughtful. She
knew that this angelic message was vital. Her God,
Jehovah, wanted her to know and to appreciate her
son’s identity and importance. So she did more than
listen. She stored away the words in her heart so that
she could ponder over them again and again in the
months and years to come. Here is an outstanding
key to the faith that Mary showed throughout her
life.—Read Hebrews 11:1.
17

Will you follow Mary’s example? Jehovah has

?lled the pages of his Word with vital spiritual
truths. However, those truths can do us little good
unless we ?rst pay attention to them. We do that by
reading the Bible regularly—not merely as a work of
literature but as the inspired Word of God. (2 Tim.
3:16) Then, like Mary, we need to store up spiritual
sayings in our heart, drawing conclusions. If we meditate on what we read in the Bible, contemplating
ways that we can apply Jehovah’s counsel more ful17. How can we follow Mary’s example when it comes to spiritual
truths?
270

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

ly, we will give our faith the nourishment it needs to
grow.
More S ayings to Preserve
18 On the baby’s eighth day, Mary and Joseph had
him circumcised as the Mosaic Law required, naming him Jesus, as directed. (Luke 1:31) Then, on the
40th day, they took him from Bethlehem to the temple in Jerusalem, some six miles away, and presented the puri?cation o?erings that the Law allowed for
poorer folk—two turtledoves or two pigeons. If they
felt shame in o?ering less than the ram and a turtledove that other parents could a?ord, they put such
feelings aside. At any rate, they received powerful
encouragement while they were there.—Luke 2:21-24.
An aged man named Simeon approached them
and gave Mary even more sayings to treasure in her
19

heart. He had been promised that he would see the
Messiah before he died, and Jehovah’s holy spirit indicated to him that little Jesus was the foretold
18. (a) How did Mary and Joseph obey the Mosaic Law in Jesus’ early days? (b) What did the o?ering that Joseph and Mary gave at the
temple reveal about their ?nancial situation?
19. (a) How did Simeon give Mary more sayings to treasure in her
heart? (b) What was Anna’s reaction on seeing Jesus?
SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

271

Savior. Simeon also warned Mary of the pain that
she would one day have to endure. He said that she
would feel as if a long sword were run through her.
(Luke 2:25-35) Even those foreboding words may
have helped Mary to endure when that hard time arrived, three decades later. After Simeon, a prophetess named Anna saw little Jesus and began speaking
about him to everyone who cherished the hope of
Jerusalem’s deliverance.—Read Luke 2:36-38.
What a good decision Joseph and Mary had
made in bringing their baby to Jehovah’s temple in
Jerusalem! They thus launched their son on a lifelong course of faithful attendance at Jehovah’s temple. While there, they gave of themselves according
to their ability and received words of instruction and
encouragement. Mary surely left the temple that day
stronger in faith, her heart full of spiritual sayings to
meditate on and share with others.
20

It is a beautiful thing to see parents today following that example. Among Jehovah’s Witnesses,
21

20. How did bringing Jesus to the temple in Jerusalem prove to be a
good decision?
21. How can we ensure that our faith will grow ever stronger, as
Mary’s did?
272

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARY

parents faithfully bring their children to Christian
meetings. Such parents give what they can, o?ering
words of encouragement to their fellow believers.
And they come away stronger, happier, and full of
good things to share with others. What a pleasure it
is to meet with them! As we do, we will ?nd that our
faith, like Mary’s, will grow ever stronger.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Mary set an example in
submissiveness and obedience?
? What can we learn from the way that Mary
coped with poverty?
? How did Mary prove to be a thoughtful,
spiritual woman?
? In what ways are you determined to follow
Mary’s example?

SHE DREW “CONCLUSIONS IN HER HEART”

273

CHAPTER NINETEEN

He Protected, He Provided,
He Persevered
JOSEPH swung another load onto the donkey’s back.
Picture him looking around at the darkened village
of Bethlehem and patting the ?ank of the sturdy
beast of burden. He was surely thinking of the
long trip ahead. Egypt! A foreign people, a foreign
tongue, foreign customs—how would his little family adapt to so much change?
2

It was not easy to tell the bad news to his beloved

wife, Mary, but Joseph braced himself and did it. He
told her of the dream in which an angel delivered this
message from God: The king, Herod, wanted their little son dead! They had to leave right away. (Read Matthew 2:13, 14.) Mary was deeply concerned. How could
anyone want to kill her innocent, harmless child? Neither Mary nor Joseph could fathom it. But they trusted in Jehovah, so they readied themselves.
1, 2. (a) What changes did Joseph and his family face? (b) What bad
news did Joseph have to tell his wife?
274

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

3

Unaware of the unfolding drama, Bethlehem

slept as Joseph, Mary, and Jesus slipped out of the
village in the darkness. Heading southward, with the
sky beginning to lighten in the east, Joseph likely
wondered what lay ahead. How could a lowly carpenter protect his family against forces so powerful?
Would he always be able to provide for his own?
Would he manage to persevere in carrying out this
heavy assignment that Jehovah God had given him,
to care for and raise this unique child? Joseph faced
daunting challenges. As we consider how he rose to
meet each one, we will see why fathers today—and
all of us—need to imitate the faith of Joseph.
4

Joseph Protected His Family
Months earlier, in his hometown of Nazareth, Jo-

seph found that his life changed forever after his engagement to the daughter of Heli. Joseph knew Mary
as an innocent, faithful young woman. But then
he learned that she was pregnant! He intended to
3. Describe the departure of Joseph and his family from B ethlehem.
(See also the picture in the standard edition.)
4, 5. (a) How did Joseph’s life change forever? (b) How did an angel
encourage Joseph to take on a weighty assignment?
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

275

divorce her secretly to protect her from scandal.1
However, an angel spoke to him in a dream, explaining that Mary was pregnant by means of Jehovah’s
holy spirit. The angel added that the son she bore
would “save his people from their sins.” He further
reassured Joseph: “Do not be afraid to take Mary
your wife home.”—Matt. 1:18-21.
5

Joseph, a righteous and obedient man, did just

that. He took on the weightiest of assignments: raising and caring for a son who was not his own but
who was most precious to God. Later, in obedience
to an imperial decree, Joseph and his pregnant wife
went to Bethlehem to register. It was there that the
child was born.
6

Joseph did not take the family back to Nazareth.

Instead, they settled in Bethlehem, just a few miles
from Jerusalem. They were poor, but Joseph did all
he could to protect Mary and Jesus from want
1 In those days, engagement was viewed in almost the same light
as marriage.

6-8. (a) What events led to another change in the lives of Joseph and
his little family? (b) What evidence suggests that Satan sent the
“star”? (See also footnote.)
276

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

or su?ering. In a short time, they took up living
in a humble home. Then, when Jesus was no longer a baby but a small child—perhaps over a year
old—their lives suddenly changed again.
7

A group of men arrived, astrologers from the

East, likely from faraway Babylon. They had followed a “star” to the home of Joseph and Mary and
were looking for a child who was to become king of
the Jews. The men were deeply respectful.
8

Whether they knew it or not, the astrologers had

put little Jesus in great peril. The “star” they had
seen led them ?rst, not to Bethlehem, but to Jerusalem.1 There they told wicked King Herod that they
were looking for a child who was to become king of
the Jews. Their report ?lled the man with jealous
rage.
9

Happily, though, there were forces greater than

Herod or Satan at work. How so? Well, when the
1 This “star” was no natural astronomical phenomenon; nor was
it sent by God. Clearly, Satan used that supernatural manifestation as part of his wicked design to destroy Jesus.

9-11. (a) In what ways were forces greater than Herod or Satan at
work? (b) How did the journey to Egypt di?er from what is described
in apocryphal myths?
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

277

visitors reached Jesus’ house and saw him with his
mother, they brought out gifts, asking for nothing in
return. How strange it must have been for Joseph
and Mary to ?nd themselves suddenly in possession of “gold and frankincense and myrrh”—valuable commodities! The astrologers intended to go
back and tell King Herod just where they had found
the child. However, Jehovah intervened. By means of
a dream, he instructed the astrologers to return
home by another route.—Read Matthew 2:1-12.
Shortly after the astrologers left, Joseph received
this warning from Jehovah’s angel: “Get up, take the
young child and its mother and ?ee into Egypt, and
stay there until I give you word; for Herod is about
to search for the young child to destroy it.” (Matt.
2:13) So, as we noted at the outset, Joseph obeyed
swiftly. He put his child’s safety above all else and
took his family to Egypt. Because those pagan astrologers had brought such costly gifts, Joseph now
had assets that might help the family during their sojourn ahead.
10

Apocryphal myths and legends later romanticized the journey to Egypt, claiming that little Jesus
11

278

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

miraculously shortened the trip, rendered bandits
harmless, and even made date palms bend down to
his mother to yield their fruit.1 In truth, it was simply a long, arduous trek into the unknown.
12

Parents can learn a lot from Joseph. He readily

set aside his work and sacri?ced his own comfort in
order to protect his family from danger. Clearly,
he viewed his family as a sacred trust from Jehovah. Parents today raise their children in a perilous
world, a world full of forces that would endanger,
corrupt, or even destroy young ones. How admirable
it is when mothers and fathers act decisively, as Joseph did, working hard to protect their children from
such in?uences!
13

Joseph Provided for His Family
It seems that the family did not stay long in

Egypt, for soon the angel informed Joseph that Herod was dead. Joseph brought his family back to their
1 The Bible clearly shows that Jesus’ ?rst miracle, “the beginning
of his signs,” did not occur until after his baptism.—John 2:1-11.

12. Parents who are raising children in this perilous world can learn
what from Joseph?
13, 14. How did Joseph and Mary end up raising their family in Nazareth?
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

279

homeland. An ancient prophecy had foretold that Jehovah would call his Son “out of Egypt.” (Matt. 2:
15) Joseph helped to ful?ll that prophecy, but where
would he lead his family now?
14

Joseph was cautious. He wisely feared Herod’s

successor, Archelaus, who was likewise vicious and
murderous. Divine guidance led Joseph to take his
family up north, away from Jerusalem and all its intrigues, back to his hometown of Nazareth in Galilee. There he and Mary raised their family.—Read
Matthew 2:19-23.
15

They led a simple life—but not an easy one. The

Bible refers to Joseph as the carpenter, using a word
that embraces many ways of working with wood,
such as cutting down timber, hauling it, and seasoning it for use in building houses, boats, small
bridges, carts, wheels, yokes, and all kinds of farm
implements. (Matt. 13:55) It was hard physical work.
A carpenter in Bible times often worked near the
doorway of his modest house or in a shop adjacent
to it.
15, 16. What was Joseph’s work like, and what tools might he have
used?
280

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

16

Joseph used a wide range of tools, some likely

handed down from his father. He may have used a
square, a plummet, a chalk line, a hatchet, a saw, an
adze, a hammer, a mallet, chisels, a drill that he
worked by pulling a bow back and forth, various
glues, and perhaps some nails, though they were
costly.
17

Imagine Jesus as a small boy watching his adop-

tive father at work. His eyes wide and intent on Joseph’s every movement, he no doubt admired the
strength in those broad shoulders and sinewy arms,
the skill of the hands, the intelligence in the eyes.
Perhaps Joseph began showing his young son how to
perform such simple tasks as using dried ?sh skin to
smooth out rough spots on wood. He likely taught
Jesus the di?erences between the varieties of wood
that he used—the sycamore ?g, oak, or olive, for example.
18

Jesus learned, too, that those strong hands that

felled trees, hewed beams, and pounded joints together were also gentle hands that caressed and
17, 18. (a) What did Jesus learn from his adoptive father? (b) Why did
Joseph have to work ever harder at his trade?
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

281

comforted him, his mother, and his siblings. Yes, Joseph and Mary had a growing family that eventually included at least six children in addition to Jesus.
(Matt. 13:55, 56) Joseph had to work ever harder to
care for and feed them all.
19

Joseph, however, understood that caring for his

family’s spiritual needs was paramount. So he spent
time teaching his children about Jehovah God and
His laws. He and Mary regularly took them to the
local synagogue, where the Law was read aloud and
explained. Perhaps Jesus was full of questions afterward, and Joseph tried hard to satisfy the boy’s
spiritual hunger. Joseph also took his family to
religious festivals in Jerusalem. For the annual Passover, Joseph may have needed two weeks to make
the 75-mile journey, observe the occasion, and return
home.
20

Christian family heads today follow a similar

pattern. They give of themselves for their children,
putting spiritual training above every other concern,
including material comforts. They go to great lengths
19. How did Joseph care for his family’s spiritual needs?
20. How can Christian family heads follow the pattern set by Joseph?
282

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

to conduct family worship at home and to take their
children to Christian meetings both large and small.
Like Joseph, they know that there is no better investment they can make for the sake of their children.
“In Mental Distress”
21 When Jesus was 12 years old, Joseph took the
family to Jerusalem as usual. It was Passover, a festive time, and large families traveled together in long
caravans through the lush spring countryside. As
they approached the starker landscapes near lofty Jerusalem, many would sing the familiar psalms of
ascent. (Ps. 120-134) The city likely teemed with
hundreds of thousands of people. Afterward, the
families and their caravans began to head homeward.
Joseph and Mary, perhaps with much to do, assumed
that Jesus was traveling with others, maybe family
members. Only after Jerusalem lay a full day behind
them did they realize a terrifying truth—Jesus was
missing!—Luke 2:41-44.
22

Frantically, they retraced their steps all the

21. What was Passover time like for Joseph’s family, and when did Joseph and Mary notice that Jesus was missing?
22, 23. What did Joseph and Mary do about their missing boy, and
what did Mary say when they ?nally found him?
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

283

way to Jerusalem. Imagine how empty and strange
the city seemed to them now as they paced the
streets, calling out their son’s name. Where could the
boy be? By the third day of searching, did Joseph
begin to wonder if he had failed terribly in this
sacred trust from Jehovah? Finally, they went to
the temple. There they searched until they came
upon a chamber where many learned men, versed in
the Law, were gathered—with young Jesus sitting
among them! Imagine the relief Joseph and Mary
felt!—Luke 2:45, 46.
Jesus was listening to the learned men and eagerly asking questions. The men were amazed at the
child’s understanding and his answers. Mary and Joseph, though, were astounded. In the Bible record,
Joseph is silent. But Mary’s words speak eloquently
for both of them: “Child, why did you treat us this
way? Here your father and I in mental distress have
been looking for you.”—Luke 2:47, 48.
23

Thus in a few deft strokes, God’s Word paints a
realistic picture of parenthood. It can be stressful
—even when the child is perfect! Parenting in today’s
24

24. How does the Bible paint a realistic picture of parenthood?
284

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

dangerous world can bring untold “mental distress,”
but fathers and mothers can take comfort in knowing that the Bible acknowledges the challenge they
face.
Jesus had stayed in the one place in the world
where he felt the closest to his heavenly Father, Jehovah, eagerly soaking up anything he could learn.
He answered his parents in simple sincerity: “Why
did you have to go looking for me? Did you not know
that I must be in the house of my Father?”—Luke
2:49.
25

Joseph surely thought about those words many
times. Perhaps he came to beam with pride over
them. After all, he had worked diligently to teach his
adopted son to feel that way about Jehovah God. By
that time in his life as a boy, Jesus already had warm
feelings about the word “father”—feelings shaped
largely by his years with Joseph.
26

If you are a father, do you realize how privileged
you are to help your children to form a concept of
27

25, 26. How did Jesus answer his parents, and how might Joseph have
felt about his son’s words?
27. As a father, how are you privileged, and why should you remember Joseph’s example?
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

285

what a loving, protective father is? Likewise, if you
have stepchildren or adopted children, remember Joseph’s example and treat each child as unique and
precious. Help those children to draw closer to their
heavenly Father, Jehovah God.—Read Ephesians 6:4.
28

Joseph Persevered Faithfully
The Bible discloses only a few more traces of Jo-

seph’s life, but they are worth considering carefully.
We read that Jesus “continued subject to them”—his
parents. We also ?nd that “Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor
with God and men.” (Read Luke 2:51, 52.) What do
those words reveal about Joseph? Several things. We
learn that Joseph continued taking the lead in his
household, for his perfect son respected his father’s
authority and remained in subjection to it.
29

We further learn that Jesus continued to grow in

wisdom. Joseph surely had much to do with his son’s
progress in that regard. In those days, there was a
time-honored proverb among the Jews. It can still
28, 29. (a) What do the words recorded at Luke 2:51, 52 reveal about
Joseph? (b) Joseph played what role in helping his son progress in wisdom?
286

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

When Did Joseph Die?
We know that Joseph was alive when Jesus was
12 years old. At that age many Jewish youths began to
learn their father’s trade and became apprentices at 15.
Joseph evidently lived long enough to teach Jesus to be
a carpenter. Was Joseph still living when Jesus began
his ministry at about 30 years of age? That seems very
doubtful. Jesus’ mother, brothers, and sisters are all
mentioned as living at that time but not Joseph. Jesus
was once even called “the son of Mary,” not the son of
Joseph. (Mark 6:3) Mary is spoken of as acting and taking initiatives on her own, without consulting a husband. (John 2:1-5) That would have been unusual in Bible times unless she was a widow. Finally, as he was
dying, Jesus entrusted the care of his mother to the
apostle John. (John 19:26, 27) There would have been
no need to do so if Joseph were still living. Likely,
then, Joseph died when Jesus was still a relatively
young man. As the eldest son, Jesus undoubtedly took
over the carpentry business and cared for the family
until his baptism.

be found and read today. The saying asserts that
only men of leisure can become truly wise, whereas
tradesmen, such as carpenters, farmers, and blacksmiths, “cannot declare justice and judgment; and
HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

287

they shall not be found where parables are spoken.”
Later, Jesus exposed the emptiness of that proverb.
As a boy, how often he had heard his adoptive father, humble carpenter though he was, teach e?ectively about Jehovah’s “justice and judgment”! No
doubt, there were countless occasions.
30

We can also see evidence of Joseph’s in?uence

in Jesus’ physical growth. A well-cared-for boy, Jesus
grew into a strong, healthy man. Further, Joseph
trained his son to be skilled at his physical work. Jesus was known not only as the carpenter’s son but
also as “the carpenter.” (Mark 6:3) So Joseph’s training was successful. Family heads wisely imitate Joseph, caring for the practical well-being of their children and ensuring that they can support themselves.
31

Once we reach the point in the Bible record

where Jesus is baptized at about the age of 30, we
?nd that Joseph is no longer part of the story. Evidence suggests that Mary was a widow by the time
Jesus began his ministry. (See the box “When Did
30. How did Joseph set an example for family heads today?
31. (a) What does evidence suggest regarding the end of Joseph’s life?
(Include the box.) (b) What example did Joseph leave for us to imitate?
288

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  JOSEPH

Joseph Die?”) Yet, Joseph left a clear mark—a shining example of a father who protected his family,
provided for them, and persevered faithfully to the
end. Any father, any family head, or any other Christian would do well to imitate the faith of Joseph.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? In what ways did Joseph act to protect his
family?
? How did Joseph provide for those who were his
own?
? What shows that Joseph persevered in his
God-given assignment?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the
example of Joseph?

HE PROTECTED, HE PROVIDED, HE PERSEVERED

289

CHAPTER TWENTY

“I Have Believed”
MARTHA could see it in her mind’s eye—her brother’s tomb, a cave sealed with a stone against the entrance. Her grief was a burden as cold and heavy as
that rock. She could barely believe that her beloved
Lazarus was gone. The four days since he had taken
his last breath seemed like one long blur of mourning, visitors, and condolences.
And now, standing before Martha was the man
who had meant the most to Lazarus. Seeing Jesus
likely brought her grief into sharp focus, for he was
the one person in all the world who could have saved
her brother. Still, Martha found some comfort in being with Jesus here outside the little hillside town of
Bethany. In her few moments with him, she again
felt warmed by the kindness in his eyes, the keen empathy that was always so encouraging. He asked her
questions that helped her to focus on her faith and
2

1. Describe Martha’s grief and its cause.
2, 3. (a) Seeing Jesus likely had what e?ect on Martha? (b) What did
Martha’s important statement show about her?
290

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

on her beliefs about the resurrection. The conversation led Martha to make one of the most important
statements that would ever pass her lips: “I have believed that you are the Christ the Son of God, the
One coming into the world.”—John 11:27.
3

As those words show, Martha was a woman of re-

markable faith. What little the Bible tells us of her
imparts profound lessons that can help us strengthen our own faith. To see how that is so, let us consider the ?rst account about Martha in the Bible.
4

“Anxious and Disturbed”
It was months earlier. Lazarus was alive and well.

His home in Bethany was about to receive the most
important of visitors, Jesus Christ. Lazarus, Martha,
and Mary were an unusual family—three grown siblings who evidently shared a home. Some researchers suggest that Martha may have been the eldest of
the three, since she seems to have acted as hostess
and at times is mentioned ?rst. (John 11:5) There is
no way of knowing whether any of the three were
ever married. At any rate, they became close friends
4. In what way was Martha’s family unusual, and what was the family’s relationship with Jesus?
“I HAVE BELIEVED”

291

of Jesus. During his ministry in Judea, where he met
so much opposition and hostility, Jesus made their
home his base. No doubt, he greatly appreciated that
haven of peace and support.
5

Martha had much to do with the comfort and

hospitality of the home. A busy, industrious soul, she
often seems to have been in a ?urry of activity. The
present occasion of Jesus’ visit was no exception.
She soon planned a special meal with many dishes
for her distinguished guest and, perhaps, some of his
traveling companions. Back then, hospitality was
very important. When a guest arrived, he was welcomed with a kiss, his sandals were removed, his feet
were washed, and his head was greased with refreshing perfumed oil. (Read Luke 7:44-47.) As to his accommodations and nourishment, every care was to
be taken.
6

Martha and Mary had their work cut out for

them. Mary, who is sometimes thought of as the
more sensitive and contemplative of the two, surely
5, 6. (a) Why was Martha particularly busy during Jesus’ present visit? (b) How did Mary respond to the opportunity a?orded by Jesus’
presence at their home?
292

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

helped her sister out at ?rst. But after Jesus arrived,
things changed. He viewed the occasion as a time to
teach—and teach he did! Unlike the religious leaders
of the day, Jesus respected women and readily taught
them about God’s Kingdom, the theme of his ministry. Mary, thrilled at this opportunity, sat at his feet
and took in every word.
7

We can just imagine the tension rising within

Martha’s heart. With all the dishes she had to prepare and all the duties she had to carry out for her
guests, she became more and more anxious and distracted. As she passed to and fro on her busy way
and saw her sister sitting there doing nothing to help
her, did she color slightly, sigh audibly, or frown? It
would not be surprising if she did. She could not do
all this work on her own!
8

Finally, Martha could no longer suppress her

frustration. She interrupted Jesus, blurting out:
“Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has
left me alone to attend to things? Tell her, therefore,
7, 8. Why did tension rise within Martha’s heart, and how did she ?nally express it?
“I HAVE BELIEVED”

293

to join in helping me.” (Luke 10:40) These were
strong words. A number of translations render her
question to this e?ect: “Lord, do you not care . . . ?”
Then she asked Jesus to correct Mary, to order her
back to work.
9

Jesus’ reply may have surprised Martha, as it has

many Bible readers since. He gently said: “Martha,
Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many
things. A few things, though, are needed, or just one.
For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it
will not be taken away from her.” (Luke 10:41, 42)
What did Jesus mean? Was he calling Martha a materialist? Was he dismissing her hard work in preparing a ?ne meal?
10

No. Jesus clearly saw that Martha’s motives

were loving and pure. Further, he did not feel that
even bounteous hospitality was necessarily wrong.
He had willingly attended Matthew’s “big reception
feast” for him sometime earlier. (Luke 5:29) Martha’s meal was not the key issue here; rather, it was
her priorities. So focused was she on her elaborate
9, 10. (a) How did Jesus reply to Martha? (b) How do we know that
Jesus was not dismissing Martha’s hard work?
294

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

meal that she lost sight of what mattered most. What
was that?
11

Jesus, the only-begotten Son of Jehovah God,

was in Martha’s home to teach the truth. Nothing,
including her lovely meal and preparations, could be
more important. Jesus was no doubt saddened that
Martha was missing out on a unique opportunity to
deepen her faith, but he let her make her own
choice.1 It was quite another thing, though, for Martha to ask Jesus to coerce Mary into missing out as
well.
12

So he gently corrected Martha, repeating her

name soothingly to calm her agitated nerves, and he
assured her that there was no need to be “anxious
and disturbed about many things.” A simple meal of
one or two dishes would be su?cient, especially
when a spiritual feast was available. By no means,
then, would he take away from Mary “the good portion” she had chosen—that of learning from Jesus!
1 In ?rst-century Jewish society, women were generally excluded
from academic activities. Their training tended to focus on duties
in the home. Martha may thus have seen it as highly unusual for a
woman to sit at the feet of a scholar to learn.

11, 12. How did Jesus gently correct Martha?
“I HAVE BELIEVED”

295

This little domestic scene is rich in lessons for
Christ’s followers today. We must never allow anything to crowd out the ?lling of our “spiritual need.”
(Matt. 5:3) While we want to imitate Martha’s generous, industrious spirit, we never want to become
so “anxious and disturbed” about the less essential
part of hospitality that we miss out on what matters
most. We associate with fellow believers, not primarily for the sake of serving or receiving sumptuous
food, but mainly for an interchange of encouragement and the imparting of spiritual gifts. (Read Romans 1:11, 12.) Even the simplest meal may make
such an upbuilding occasion possible.
13

A B eloved Brother Lost—And Restored
14 Did Martha accept Jesus’ gentle reproof and
learn from it? We need not wonder. The apostle
John, in introducing a thrilling account about Martha’s brother, reminds us: “Now Jesus loved Martha
and her sister and Lazarus.” (John 11:5) Months had
passed since Jesus’ visit to Bethany described above.
13. What lessons can we learn from the way that Jesus corrected Martha?
14. Why can we be sure that Martha set a good example in accepting
correction?
296

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

Clearly, Martha had not indulged in sulking; she was
not nursing a grudge against Jesus for his loving
counsel. She had taken it to heart. In this matter too,
she set an excellent example of faith for us, for who
of us does not need a little correction at times?
15

When her brother took ill, Martha surely busied

herself with his care. She did everything in her power to soothe his discomfort and help him get better.
Nonetheless, Lazarus sank still deeper into his illness. Hour after hour, his sisters stayed by his side
to care for him. How often Martha must have gazed
into her brother’s haggard face, remembering their
many years together and the joys and sorrows they
had shared!
16

When it looked as if Lazarus was beyond their

help, Martha and Mary sent a message to Jesus. He
was preaching some two days’ journey away. Their
message was simple: “Lord, see! the one for whom
you have a?ection is sick.” (John 11:1, 3) They knew
that Jesus loved their brother, and they had faith
that he would do whatever he could to help his
15, 16. (a) How did Martha surely respond when her brother took ill?
(b) Why were Martha’s and Mary’s hopes dashed?
“I HAVE BELIEVED”

297

friend. Did they cling to the hope that Jesus might
arrive before it was too late? If so, their hopes were
dashed. Lazarus died.
Together, Martha and Mary mourned their
brother, taking care of the preparations for his burial and receiving the many guests from Bethany and
its environs. Still, no news of Jesus. Martha may
have grown more puzzled as the time passed. Finally, four days after Lazarus’ death, Martha heard that
Jesus was nearing the town. Ever the woman of action, even in this grim hour, Martha got up and,
without telling Mary, rushed out to meet Jesus.
—Read John 11:18-20.
17

When Martha caught sight of her Master, she
put into words the thought that had been tormenting her and Mary for days: “Lord, if you had been
here my brother would not have died.” But hope and
faith were not dead in Martha. She added: “And yet
at present I know that as many things as you ask
God for, God will give you.” Jesus immediately said
18

17. What puzzled Martha, and how did she react when she heard that
Jesus was nearing the town?
18, 19. Martha expressed what hope, and why was her faith remarkable?
298

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

something to strengthen her faith: “Your brother will
rise.”—John 11:21-23.
19

Martha thought that Jesus was talking about the

future resurrection, so she replied: “I know he will
rise in the resurrection on the last day.” (John 11:24)
Her faith in that teaching was remarkable. Some Jewish religious leaders, called Sadducees, denied that
there would be a resurrection, though it was a
clear teaching in the inspired Scriptures. (Dan. 12:
13; Mark 12:18) Martha knew, however, that Jesus
taught the resurrection hope and had even performed resurrections—although not of anyone who
had been dead as long as Lazarus had. She did not
know what lay ahead.
20

Jesus then made an unforgettable statement: “I

am the resurrection and the life.” Indeed, Jehovah
God has given his Son the authority to perform resurrections on a global scale in the future. Jesus
asked Martha: “Do you believe this?” Then she gave
the answer discussed at the outset of this chapter.
She had faith that Jesus was the Christ, or Messiah,
20. Explain the meaning of Jesus’ unforgettable statement recorded at
John 11:25-27 and of Martha’s reply.
“I HAVE BELIEVED”

299

that he was the Son of Jehovah God, and that he was
the one whom the prophets had foretold would come
into the world.—John 5:28, 29; read John 11:25-27.
21

Do Jehovah God and his Son, Jesus Christ, val-

ue faith like that of Martha? The events that next
unfolded before Martha’s eyes provide the clearest of
answers. She hurried to get her sister. Thereafter, she
saw that Jesus was deeply moved as he talked to
Mary and the many mourners with her. She saw the
tears come to his eyes as he freely showed his deep
grief over the pain that death causes. She heard Jesus order that the stone be rolled away from her
brother’s tomb.—John 11:28-39.
22

Ever practical, Martha objected that the body

would smell by now, four days after death. Jesus reminded her: “Did I not tell you that if you would believe you would see the glory of God?” She did believe, and she did see the glory of Jehovah God.
Right then and there, he empowered his Son to bring
Lazarus back to life! Think of the moments that
must have been etched in Martha’s memory to the
21, 22. (a) How did Jesus reveal his feelings for those who mourn?
(b) Describe the resurrection of Lazarus.
300

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

end of her days: Jesus’ commanding call, “Lazarus,
come on out!”; the faint noise from the cave where
Lazarus was entombed as the man rose and, still
bound in the bandages used to prepare the body,
inched his way to the door of the cave; Jesus’ command to “loose him and let him go”; and, to be sure,
the ecstatic embrace as Martha and Mary ?ew into
their brother’s arms. (Read John 11:40-44.) The burden on Martha’s heart was lifted!
23

This account shows that the resurrection of the

dead is not mere wishful thinking; it is a heartwarming Bible teaching and a proven historical reality.
(Job 14:14, 15) Jehovah and his Son love to reward
faith, as they did in the case of Martha, Mary, and
Lazarus. They have such rewards in store for you too
if you build strong faith.
24

“Martha Was Ministering”
The Bible record mentions Martha just one more

time. It was at the outset of the ?nal week of Jesus’
life on earth. Knowing well what hardships lay ahead
23. What do Jehovah and Jesus want to do for you, and what do you
need to do?
24. The Bible record gives us what last glimpse of Martha?
“I HAVE BELIEVED”

301

of him, Jesus again chose that haven at Bethany as
his residence. From there he would walk the two
miles to Jerusalem. Jesus and Lazarus were dining at
the home of Simon the leper, and there we get this
last glimpse of our subject: “Martha was ministering.”—John 12:2.
25

How typical of that industrious woman! When

we ?rst come upon her in the Bible, she is working;
when we leave her, she is still working, doing her
best to care for the needs of those around her. Congregations of Christ’s followers today are blessed to
have women like Martha—stouthearted and generous, always putting their faith into action by giving
of themselves. Did Martha keep doing just that? It
seems likely. If so, she acted wisely, for she had yet
to meet her share of obstacles.
26

Within days, Martha had to endure the terrible

death of her beloved Master, Jesus. Further, the
same murderous hypocrites who killed him were determined to kill Lazarus as well, since his resurrection was boosting the faith of so many. (Read John
25. Why are congregations today blessed to have women like Martha?
26. What did Martha’s faith help her to do?
302

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  MARTHA

12:9-11.) And, of course, death did eventually sever
the loving bonds that joined Martha to her siblings.
We do not know how or when that happened, but we
may be fairly sure of this: Martha’s precious faith
helped her endure to the end. That is why Christians
today do well to imitate the faith of Martha.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? What can we learn from the counsel Jesus gave
Martha?
? In what ways did Martha display a giving,
industrious spirit?
? How did Martha show remarkable faith?
? In what ways would you like to imitate the faith
of Martha?

“I HAVE BELIEVED”

303

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

He Fought Against Fear and Doubt
PETER strained against the oar and peered into the
night. Was that a faint glow he saw on the eastern
horizon, a sign of dawn at last? The muscles of his
back and shoulders burned from long hours of rowing. The wind that whipped his hair about had
churned the Sea of Galilee into a rage. Wave after
wave crashed against the prow of the ?shing boat,
soaking him with cold spray. He rowed on.
2

Somewhere back there on shore, Peter and his

companions had left Jesus by himself. That day, they
had seen Jesus feed a hungry crowd of thousands
with just a few loaves and ?sh. The people responded by seeking to make Jesus king, but he wanted no
part of politics. He was also determined to keep his
followers from cultivating such ambitions. Evading
the crowds, he compelled his disciples to board the
boat and head for the opposite shore while he went
1-3. What had Peter witnessed during an eventful day, and what kind
of night was he experiencing?
304

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

up into the mountain alone to pray.—Mark 6:35-45;
read John 6:14-17.
3

The moon, nearly full, had been high overhead

when the disciples set out; now it was sinking slowly toward the western horizon. Yet, they had managed to travel only a few miles. The exertion and the
constant roar of the wind and the waves made conversation di?cult. Likely, Peter was alone with his
thoughts.
4

How much there was to think about! Peter had

?rst met Jesus of Nazareth over two eventful years
earlier. He had learned a great deal, but he still had
much to learn. His willingness to do so—to struggle
against such obstacles as doubt and fear—make him
an outstanding example for us to imitate. Let us see
why.
5

“We Have Found the Messiah”!
Peter would never forget the day he met Jesus.

His brother, Andrew, had ?rst brought him the astounding news: “We have found the Messiah.” With
4. What struggles make Peter’s example an outstanding one for us to
imitate?
5, 6. What kind of life did Peter lead?
HE FOUGHT AGAINST FEAR AND DOUBT

305

those words, Peter’s life began to change. It would
never again be the same.—John 1:41.
6

Peter lived in Capernaum, a city on the northern

shore of a freshwater lake called the Sea of Galilee.
He and Andrew were partners with James and John,
the sons of Zebedee, in a ?shing business. Living
with Peter were not only his wife but also his
mother-in-law and his brother, Andrew. To support
such a household by ?shing surely required hard
work, energy, and resourcefulness. We can imagine
the countless long nights of labor—the men letting
out the dragnets between two boats and hauling
aboard whatever catch the lake a?orded. We can also
picture toilsome daylight hours as the ?sh were sorted and sold, the nets mended and cleaned.
7

Andrew, the Bible tells us, was a disciple of John

the Baptist. Peter surely listened to his brother’s reports about John’s message with intense interest.
One day, Andrew saw John point out Jesus of Nazareth and say: “See, the Lamb of God!” Andrew immediately became a follower of Jesus and eagerly
7. What did Peter come to hear about Jesus, and why was the news
thrilling?
306

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

told Peter this thrilling news: The Messiah had arrived! (John 1:35-40) After the rebellion in Eden
some 4,000 years earlier, Jehovah God had promised
that a special individual would come to provide real
hope for mankind. (Gen. 3:15) Andrew had met this
very Rescuer, the Messiah himself! Peter hurried o?
to meet Jesus as well.
8

Until that day, Peter was known by the name Si-

mon, or Simeon. But Jesus looked at him and said:
“ ‘You are Simon the son of John; you will be called
Cephas’ (which is translated Peter).” (John 1:42)
“Cephas” is a common noun meaning “stone,” or
“rock.” Evidently, Jesus’ words were prophetic. He
foresaw that Peter would become like a rock—a
stable, sturdy, and reliable in?uence among Christ’s
followers. Did Peter see himself that way? It seems
doubtful. Even some modern-day readers of the Gospel accounts see little that is rocklike in Peter. Some
have suggested that his character as revealed in the
Bible record seems to be unsteady, inconstant, vacillating.
8. What was the meaning of the name Jesus bestowed on Peter, and
why do some still question that choice of a name?
HE FOUGHT AGAINST FEAR AND DOUBT

307

Peter did have his faults. Jesus was not blind to
those. But Jesus, like his Father, Jehovah, was always
looking for the good in people. Jesus saw much potential in Peter, and He sought to help him build on
those good qualities. Jehovah and his Son look for
the good in us today too. We may have a hard time
believing that there is much good in us for them to
?nd. However, we need to trust their viewpoint and
prove ourselves willing to be trained and molded, as
Peter was.—Read 1 John 3:19, 20.
9

“Stop B eing Afraid”
10 Peter likely accompanied Jesus on part of the
preaching tour that ensued. He may thus have seen
Jesus perform his ?rst miracle, that of turning water
into wine at the wedding feast in Cana. More important, he heard Jesus’ marvelous and hope-?lled message about the Kingdom of God. Still, he tore himself away and returned to his ?shing business. Some
months later, though, Peter was again face-to-face
with Jesus—and this time Jesus invited Peter to follow him full-time as a way of life.
9. What do Jehovah and his Son look for, and why, do you think, should
we trust their point of view?
10. What did Peter likely witness, yet to what did he return?
308

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

11

Peter had just endured a discouraging night’s

work. Again and again, the ?shermen had let down
their nets, only to haul them in empty. Peter surely
brought all his experience and ingenuity to bear on
the problem, trying various spots in the lake to ?nd
where the ?sh were feeding. No doubt, there were
times when he, like so many ?shermen, wished he
could peer right into the murky waters to ?nd the
schools of ?sh or somehow will them into his nets.
Of course, such thoughts could only deepen his frustration. This was no pleasure sport for Peter; people
depended on him to catch ?sh. Finally, he came
ashore empty-handed. The nets had to be cleaned.
He was thus busily engaged when Jesus approached.
12

A crowd was pressing in on Jesus, eagerly taking

in his every word. Hemmed in by them, Jesus got
into Peter’s boat and asked him to pull away a bit
from land. With his voice carrying clearly over the
water, Jesus taught the crowd. Peter listened with
rapt attention, as did those ashore. He never tired
of hearing Jesus develop the central theme of his
11, 12. (a) What kind of night’s work had Peter endured? (b) Listening to Jesus likely brought what questions to Peter’s mind?
HE FOUGHT AGAINST FEAR AND DOUBT

309

preaching—the Kingdom of God. What a privilege it
would be to help the Christ spread this message of
hope throughout the land! But would that be practical? How would Peter feed his family? Perhaps Peter thought again of the long and fruitless night behind him.—Luke 5:1-3.
13

When Jesus ?nished speaking, he told Peter:

“Pull out to where it is deep, and you men let down
your nets for a catch.” Peter was full of doubt. He
said: “Instructor, for a whole night we toiled and
took nothing, but at your bidding I will lower the
nets.” Peter had just washed o? the nets. Surely the
last thing he wanted to do was lower them yet again
—especially now when the ?sh would not even be
feeding! Still, he complied, likely signaling to his
partners in a second boat to follow them.—Luke 5:
4, 5.
14

Peter felt an unexpected weight as he started

hauling in the nets. Incredulous, he pulled harder,
and before long he could see a great mass of ?sh
wriggling within the mesh! Frantically, he motioned
13, 14. What miracle did Jesus perform for Peter, and how did Peter
react?
310

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

to the men in the second boat to come to help. As
they did, it soon became apparent that one boat
could not contain all these ?sh. They ?lled both vessels, but there were too many—the boats started to
sink under the weight. Peter was overwhelmed with
astonishment. He had seen Christ’s power in action
before, but this instance was so personal. Here was
a man who could even cause the ?sh to enter the
nets! Fear welled up in Peter. He sank to his knees
and said: “Depart from me, because I am a sinful
man, Lord.” How could he ever prove worthy to associate with One who wielded the very power of God
in such ways?—Read Luke 5:6-9.
15

Jesus kindly said: “Stop being afraid. From now

on you will be catching men alive.” (Luke 5:10, 11)
This was no time for doubt or fear. Peter’s doubts
about such practical matters as ?shing were unfounded; his fears about his own faults and inadequacies were just as baseless. Jesus had a great work
to do, a ministry that would change history. He
served a God who “will forgive in a large way.” (Isa.
15. How did Jesus teach Peter that his doubts and fears were unfounded?
HE FOUGHT AGAINST FEAR AND DOUBT

311

55:7) Jehovah would take care of Peter’s needs, both
physical and spiritual.—Matt. 6:33.
16

Peter responded quickly, as did James and John.

“They brought the boats back to land, and abandoned everything and followed him.” (Luke 5:11) Peter put faith in Jesus and in the One who sent him.
It was the best decision he could make. Christians
today who overcome their doubt and fear to take up
service to God are likewise showing faith. Such trust
in Jehovah is never misplaced.—Ps. 22:4, 5.
17

“Why Did You Give Way to Doubt?”
Some two years after meeting Jesus, Peter rowed

through that windy night on the Sea of Galilee, as
mentioned at the outset of this chapter. Of course,
we cannot know what memories crossed his mind.
There were so many to choose from! Jesus had
healed Peter’s mother-in-law. He had delivered the
Sermon on the Mount. Again and again, through his
teaching and his powerful works, he had demonstrated that he was Jehovah’s Chosen One, the Messiah.
16. How did Peter, James, and John respond to Jesus’ invitation, and
why was it the best decision they could make?
17. Peter had what memories of the two years since meeting Jesus?
312

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

As the months passed, Peter’s faults, such as his tendency to give in to impulses of fear and doubt, had
surely subsided to a degree. Jesus had even chosen
Peter to be one of the 12 apostles! Still, Peter had
not yet vanquished fear and doubt, as he would soon
learn.
18

During the fourth watch of that night, or some-

time between 3:00 a.m. and sunrise, Peter suddenly
stopped rowing and sat bolt upright. There—across
the waves—something was moving! Was it the spray
of the waves catching the moonlight? No, it was too
steady, too upright. It was a man! Yes, a man, and he
was walking on the surface of the sea! As the ?gure
neared, it looked as though he was going to walk
right by them. Terri?ed, the disciples thought it was
some kind of apparition. The man spoke: “Take courage, it is I; have no fear.” It was Jesus!—Matt.
14:25-28.
19

Peter responded: “Lord, if it is you, command me

to come to you over the waters.” His ?rst impulse
was a courageous one. Full of excitement at this
18, 19. (a) Describe what Peter saw on the Sea of Galilee. (b) How
did Jesus grant Peter’s request?
HE FOUGHT AGAINST FEAR AND DOUBT

313

unique miracle, Peter sought to have his faith further con?rmed. He wanted to be part of the action.
Kindly, Jesus beckoned him. Peter clambered over
the side of the vessel and down onto the undulating
surface of the sea. Imagine Peter’s sensation as he
found solid footing beneath him and then stood on
top of the waters. He must have been ?lled with wonder as he made his way toward Jesus. However, another impulse soon welled up in him.—Read Matthew
14:29.
20

Peter needed to keep his focus on Jesus. It was

Jesus, using the power of Jehovah, who was keeping
Peter above the wind-swept waves. And Jesus was
doing so in response to Peter’s faith in him. But Peter got distracted. We read: “Looking at the windstorm, he got afraid.” Peter took in an eyeful of
those waves crashing against the boat, tossing spray
and foam to the wind, and he panicked. He probably imagined himself sinking in that lake, drowning
there. As fear rose in his heart, his faith sank. The
man who had been named Rock because of his po20. (a) How did Peter lose his focus, and with what result? (b) What
lesson did Jesus drive home to Peter?
314

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

tential for steadiness began to sink like a stone because of his wavering faith. Peter was an able swimmer, but he did not rely on that ability now. He cried
out: “Lord, save me!” Jesus caught him by the hand
and pulled him up. Then, while still on the water’s
surface, he drove home this important lesson to Peter: “You with little faith, why did you give way to
doubt?”—Matt. 14:30, 31.
21

“Give way to doubt”—what an apt phrase!

Doubt can be a powerful, destructive force. If we
yield to it, it can eat away at our faith and cause us
to sink spiritually. We need to ?ght back vigorously!
How? By keeping the right focus. If we dwell on what
scares us, what discourages us, what distracts us
from Jehovah and his Son, we will ?nd our doubts
growing. If we focus on Jehovah and his Son, on
what they have done, are doing, and will do for those
who love them, we will keep corrosive doubts at bay.
22

As Peter followed Jesus up into the boat, he saw

the storm die down. Quiet fell on the Sea of Galilee.
Peter joined his fellow disciples in declaring: “You
21. Why is doubt dangerous, and how can we ?ght against it?
22. Why is Peter’s faith worth imitating?
HE FOUGHT AGAINST FEAR AND DOUBT

315

are really God’s Son.” (Matt. 14:33) As dawn broke
over the lake, Peter’s heart must have soared. He repudiated doubt and fear. Granted, he had a long way
to go before he became the rocklike Christian that
Jesus foresaw. But he was determined to keep trying,
to keep growing. Do you have such determination?
You will ?nd that Peter’s faith is worth imitating.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Peter overcome his doubts about
following Jesus?
? How did Jesus show that he saw the good in
Peter?
? On the Sea of Galilee, what did Peter learn
about giving way to doubt?
? In what ways would you like to imitate Peter’s
faith?

316

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

He Was Loyal in the Face of Tests
PETER gazed anxiously around at the faces of Jesus’ audience. The setting was the synagogue in Capernaum. Peter’s home was in this town; his ?shing
business was here, on the northern shore of the Sea
of Galilee; many of his friends, relatives, and business acquaintances lived here. No doubt Peter was
hoping that his townsmen would see Jesus as he did
and that they would share the thrill of learning
about God’s Kingdom from the greatest of all teachers. No such outcome seemed likely that day.
2

Many had stopped listening. Some were murmur-

ing audibly, objecting to the thrust of Jesus’ message. Most troubling to Peter, though, was the reaction of some of Jesus’ own disciples. Their faces
no longer bore that happy expression of enlightenment, the thrill of discovery, the joy of learning the
truth. Now, they looked upset, even bitter. Some
1, 2. What was Peter likely hoping for as Jesus spoke in Capernaum,
yet what happened instead?
HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

317

spoke up, calling Jesus’ speech shocking. Refusing to
listen anymore, they left the synagogue—and quit
following Jesus as well.—Read John 6:60, 66.
3

It was a di?cult time for Peter and for his fellow

apostles. Peter did not fully grasp what Jesus said
that day. No doubt he could see why Jesus’ words
might seem o?ensive if taken at face value. What
would Peter do? It was not the ?rst time that his loyalty to his Master was tested; nor would it be the
last. Let us see how Peter’s faith helped him to rise
to such challenges and remain loyal.
4

Loyal When Others Turned Disloyal
Peter often found himself surprised by Jesus.

Again and again, his Master acted and spoke in a
way that was contrary to what people expected of
Him. Just a day earlier, Jesus had miraculously fed
a crowd of thousands. In response, they had attempted to make him king. Yet, he surprised many by
withdrawing from them, directing his disciples to
board a boat and sail toward Capernaum. As the dis3. What did Peter’s faith help him to do a number of times?
4, 5. How had Jesus acted in ways that were contrary to what people
expected of him?
318

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

ciples made their way over water during the night,
Jesus surprised them again by walking across the
stormy Sea of Galilee, giving Peter an important lesson in faith.
5

In the morning, they soon found that those

crowds had followed them around the lake. Evidently, though, the people were driven by a desire to see
Jesus produce more food miraculously, not by any
hunger for spiritual truths. Jesus rebuked them for
their materialistic spirit. (John 6:25-27) That discussion continued at the synagogue in Capernaum,
where Jesus again went against expectations in an effort to teach a vital but di?cult truth.
6

Jesus wanted those people to see him, not as a

source of mere physical food, but as a spiritual provision from God, as the one whose life and death as
a man would make eternal life possible for others.
So he gave an illustration comparing himself to manna, the bread that came down from heaven in Moses’ day. When some objected, he used a vivid illustration, explaining that it was necessary to partake
6. What illustration did Jesus give, and how did his listeners react?
HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

319

of his ?esh and his blood in order to attain life. It
was at this point that the objections became insistent. Some said: “This speech is shocking; who can
listen to it?” Many of Jesus’ own disciples decided to
quit following him.1—John 6:48-60, 66.
7

What would Peter do? He too must have been

ba?ed by Jesus’ speech. He did not yet grasp that
Jesus must die in order to carry out God’s will. Was
Peter tempted to slink o? like those ?ckle disciples
who left Jesus that day? No; something important set
Peter apart from those men. What was it?
8

Jesus turned to his apostles and said: “You do not

want to go also, do you?” (John 6:67) He addressed
the 12, but it was Peter who spoke up. It was often
so. Peter may have been the oldest of them. In any
case, he was certainly the most outspoken of the
group; rarely, it seems, did Peter hesitate to say what
was on his mind. In this case, what was on his mind
1 We can see the inconstancy of the crowd at the synagogue if we
compare their reactions to Jesus’ speech here with their expressions just the day before when they enthusiastically proclaimed
him a prophet of God.—John 6:14.

7, 8. (a) What did Peter not yet grasp about Jesus’ role? (b) How did
Peter answer Jesus’ question to the apostles?
320

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

was this beautiful and memorable statement: “Lord,
whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life.”—John 6:68.
9

Do not those words touch your heart? Peter’s

faith in Jesus had helped him to build a priceless
quality—loyalty. Peter saw clearly that Jesus was the
only Savior Jehovah had provided and that Jesus
saved by means of his sayings—his teachings about
the Kingdom of God. Peter knew that even if there
were some things that puzzled him, there was nowhere else to go if he wanted God’s favor and the
blessing of everlasting life.
10

Is that how you feel? Sadly, many in today’s

world claim to love Jesus but fail the test of loyalty.
Genuine loyalty to Christ requires that we share Peter’s view of Jesus’ teachings. We need to learn them,
to grasp their meaning, and to live by them—even
when they surprise us by running contrary to our expectations or personal preferences. Only by proving
loyal can we hope to attain to the everlasting life
that Jesus wants for us.—Read Psalm 97:10.
9. How did Peter show loyalty to Jesus?
10. How can we today imitate Peter’s loyalty?
HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

321

11

Loyal When Corrected
Not long after that busy time, Jesus led his apos-

tles and some disciples on a long trek northward.
The snowcapped peak of Mount Hermon, at the
northernmost limit of the Promised Land, was at
times visible even from the blue waters of the Sea of
Galilee. Gradually, that mountain loomed higher as
the group approached, following the rising terrain up
to the villages near Caesarea Philippi.1 In this lovely setting, with a perspective over much of the Promised Land to the south, Jesus asked his followers an
important question.
12

“Who are the crowds saying that I am?” he want-

ed to know. We can just imagine Peter looking into
Jesus’ keen eyes, sensing again his Master’s kindness
and his powerful, clear intelligence. Jesus was interested in the conclusions his audiences were drawing
from what they saw and heard. Jesus’ disciples an1 From the shores of the Sea of Galilee, that 30-mile journey took
the group from about 700 feet below sea level to 1,150 feet above,
through regions of great natural beauty.

11. Jesus led his followers on what trek? (See also footnote.)
12, 13. (a) Why did Jesus ask about the crowds and their view of him?
(b) In his words to Jesus, how did Peter show genuine faith?
322

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

swered the question, repeating some of the popular
misconceptions surrounding Jesus’ identity. But Jesus wanted to know more. Were his closest followers
making the same mistakes? “You, though, who do
you say I am?” he asked.—Luke 9:18-20.
Again, Peter was quick to respond. He put into
clear, bold words the conclusion that had formed in
the hearts of many there. “You are the Christ, the
Son of the living God,” he said. We can imagine Jesus giving Peter a smile of approval as He commended him warmly. Jesus reminded Peter that it was Jehovah God—not any man—who had made this vital
truth so plain to those with genuine faith. Peter
had been enabled to discern one of the greatest
truths Jehovah had yet revealed—the identity of the
long-promised Messiah, or Christ!—Read Matthew 16:
16, 17.
13

This Christ was the one called in ancient prophecy a stone that the builders would reject. (Ps. 118:
22; Luke 20:17) With such prophecies in mind, Jesus
revealed that Jehovah would establish a congregation on the very stone, or rock-mass, that Peter had
14

14. Jesus bestowed on Peter what important privileges?
HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

323

just identi?ed. Then he bestowed on Peter some very
important privileges in that congregation. He did
not give Peter primacy over the other apostles, as
some have assumed, but he gave him responsibilities.
He gave Peter “the keys of the kingdom.” (Matt. 16:
19) It would be Peter’s privilege to open the hope of
entering God’s Kingdom to three di?erent ?elds of
mankind—?rst to the Jews, then to the Samaritans,
and ?nally to the Gentiles, or non-Jews.
15

However, Jesus later stated that those given

much would have more to answer for, and the truth
of those words is borne out in Peter’s case. (Luke 12:
48) Jesus continued to reveal vital truths about the
Messiah, including the certainty of his own impending su?ering and death at Jerusalem. Peter was disturbed to hear such things. He took Jesus aside and
rebuked him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you
will not have this destiny at all.”—Matt. 16:21, 22.
16

Peter surely meant well, so Jesus’ reply must

have come as a surprise. He turned his back on Pe15. What led Peter to rebuke Jesus, and in what words?
16. How did Jesus correct Peter, and what practical counsel may all
of us ?nd in Jesus’ words?
324

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

ter, looked at the rest of the disciples—who had likely been thinking something similar—and said: “Get
behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me,
because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of
men.” (Matt. 16:23; Mark 8:32, 33) Jesus’ words contain practical counsel for us all. It is only too easy
to allow human thinking to take priority over godly
thinking. If we do so, even when we mean to help,
we may inadvertently become proponents of Satan’s
purpose rather than God’s. How, though, did Peter
respond?
Peter must have realized that Jesus was not calling him Satan the Devil in any literal sense. After
all, Jesus did not speak to Peter as he had to Satan.
To Satan, Jesus had said: “Go away”; to Peter, he
said: “Get behind me.” (Matt. 4:10) Jesus did not
cast o? this apostle in whom he saw a great deal of
good, but he simply corrected Peter’s wrong thinking in this matter. It is not hard to see that Peter
needed to stop getting in front of his Master as a
stumbling block and needed to get back behind him
as a supportive follower.
17

17. What did Jesus mean by telling Peter to “get behind” him?
HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

325

Did Peter argue, get angry, or sulk? No; he humbly accepted correction. He thus demonstrated loyalty again. All those who follow Christ will need cor18

rection at times. Only if we humbly accept discipline
and learn from it can we continue to grow closer to
Jesus Christ and his Father, Jehovah God.—Read
Proverbs 4:13.
Loyalty Rewarded
19 Jesus soon made another startling statement:
“Truly I say to you that there are some of those
standing here that will not taste death at all until
?rst they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.” (Matt. 16:28) No doubt those words ?lled Peter with curiosity. What could Jesus possibly mean?
Perhaps Peter wondered if the strong correction he
had just received meant that no such special privileges would be coming his way.
20

About a week later, however, Jesus took James,

John, and Peter up into “a lofty mountain”—perhaps
18. How did Peter demonstrate loyalty, and how can we imitate him?
19. Jesus made what startling statement, and what may Peter have wondered?
20, 21. (a) Describe the vision that Peter witnessed. (b) How did the
conversation among the ?gures in the vision help to correct Peter?
326

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

Mount Hermon, which was not many miles distant.
It was likely nighttime, since the three men were
combating sleepiness. But as Jesus prayed, something happened that drove away any drowsiness.
—Matt. 17:1; Luke 9:28, 29, 32.
21

Jesus began to change before their eyes. His face

started to shine, to glow, until it became as brilliant
as the sun. His clothes too were glistening white.
Then two ?gures appeared with Jesus, one representing Moses and the other, Elijah. They conversed
with him about “his departure that he was destined
to ful?ll at Jerusalem”—evidently his death and resurrection. How clear it was that Peter had been
wrong to deny that Jesus had such a painful experience ahead of him!—Luke 9:30, 31.
22

Peter felt compelled to participate somehow in

this extraordinary vision—and perhaps to prolong it.
It looked as if Moses and Elijah were parting from
Jesus. So Peter spoke up: “Instructor, it is ?ne for us
to be here, so let us erect three tents, one for you
and one for Moses and one for Elijah.” Of course,
22, 23. (a) How did Peter show an enthusiastic and warm spirit?
(b) Peter, James, and John received what other reward that night?
HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

327

these visionary representations of two of Jehovah’s
long-dead servants did not need tents. Peter really
did not know what he was saying. Are you not drawn
to the man, though, for his enthusiastic and warm
spirit?—Luke 9:33.
23

Peter, James, and John received another reward

that night. A cloud formed and loomed over them
on the mountain. From it came a voice—the voice of
Jehovah God! He said: “This is my Son, the one that
has been chosen. Listen to him.” Then the vision was
over, and they were alone with Jesus on the mountain.—Luke 9:34-36.
24

What a gift that trans?guration vision was for

Peter—and for us! Decades later he wrote of the
privilege he had that night of actually seeing a preview of Jesus as a glorious heavenly King and of being one of the “eyewitnesses of his magni?cence.”
That vision con?rmed many prophecies of God’s
Word and strengthened Peter’s faith for the trials he
had yet to face. (Read 2 Peter 1:16-19.) It can do the
same for us if, like Peter, we remain loyal to the Mas24. (a) How did the trans?guration vision bene?t Peter? (b) How may
we today bene?t from the trans?guration vision?
328

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

ter whom Jehovah has appointed over us, learning
from him, accepting his discipline and correction,
and humbly following him day by day.

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Peter’s faith move him to be loyal
when many abandoned Jesus?
? How did Peter’s faith and loyalty help him to
accept correction?
? How did the trans?guration vision strengthen
Peter’s faith?
? In what further ways would you like to imitate
Peter’s faith?

HE WAS LOYAL IN THE FACE OF TESTS

329

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

He Learned Forgiveness From the Master
PETER would never forget that terrible moment
when their eyes met. Did he see in Jesus’ gaze some
hint of disappointment or reproach? We cannot venture so far; the inspired record says only that “the
Lord turned and looked upon Peter.” (Luke 22:61)
But in that one glance, Peter saw the depth of his
own failure. He realized that he had just done the
very thing that Jesus had foretold, the one thing that
Peter had insisted he would never do—he had disowned his beloved Master. It was a low point for Peter, perhaps the worst moment of the worst day of
his life.
2

All was not lost, though. Because Peter was a

man of great faith, he still had an opportunity to recover from his mistakes and to learn one of Jesus’
greatest lessons. It had to do with forgiveness. Each
1. What may have been the worst moment of Peter’s life?
2. Peter needed to learn what lesson, and how may we bene?t from his
story?
330

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

of us needs to learn the same lesson, so let us follow
Peter on this di?cult journey.
3

A Man With Much to Learn
About six months earlier in his hometown of Ca-

pernaum, Peter approached Jesus and asked: “Lord,
how many times is my brother to sin against me and
am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?” Peter likely thought that he was being generous. After all, the
religious leaders of the day taught that one had to
forgive only three times! Jesus replied: “Not, Up to
seven times, but, Up to seventy-seven times.”—Matt.
18:21, 22.
4

Was Jesus suggesting that Peter keep a running

tally of a transgressor’s actions? No; rather, by turning Peter’s 7 into a 77, he was saying that love does
not allow us to set an arbitrary limit on forgiveness.
(1 Cor. 13:4, 5) Jesus showed that Peter had been in?uenced by a hard-hearted and unforgiving spirit
that was prevalent in those days, one that meted out forgiveness as if by an accountant’s ledger.
3, 4. (a) What question did Peter ask Jesus, and what might Peter have
thought? (b) How did Jesus show that Peter had been in?uenced by the
spirit prevalent in those days?
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

331

However, divine forgiveness is expansive, generous.
—Read 1 John 1:7-9.
5

Peter did not argue with Jesus. But did Jesus’ les-

son really reach his heart? Sometimes we learn the
most about forgiveness when we realize how desperately we need it ourselves. So let us return to the
events leading up to Jesus’ death. In those di?cult
hours, Peter gave his Master many things to forgive.
6

A Growing Need for Forgiveness
It was a momentous evening—the ?nal night of

Jesus’ earthly life. Jesus still had much to teach his
apostles—for instance, about humility. Jesus set an
example by humbly washing their feet, a job normally assigned to the lowliest of servants. At ?rst,
Peter questioned Jesus’ actions. Then he refused
the service. Next he insisted that Jesus wash not
only his feet but also his hands and head! Jesus did
not lose his patience but calmly explained the importance and meaning of what he was doing.—John
13:1-17.
5. When might we learn the most about forgiveness?
6. How did Peter respond as Jesus tried to teach the apostles about humility, yet how did Jesus treat him?
332

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

7

Shortly thereafter, Peter further tested Jesus’ pa-

tience. The apostles fell to bickering over who of
them was the greatest, and Peter surely played a part
in that shameful display of human pride. Nonetheless, Jesus corrected them kindly and even commended them for what they had done well; they had
shown faithfulness in sticking to their Master. He
foretold, however, that they would all abandon him.
Peter countered that he would stick with Jesus even
in the face of death. Jesus prophesied that, on the
contrary, Peter would deny his Master three times
that very night before a cock crowed twice. Peter
then not only contradicted Jesus but boasted that he
would prove more faithful than all the other apostles!—Matt. 26:31-35; Mark 14:27-31; Luke 22:24-28;
John 13:36-38.
8

Was Jesus close to losing his patience with Peter?

In fact, throughout this di?cult time, Jesus kept
looking for the good in his imperfect apostles. He
knew that Peter would fail him, yet He said: “I have
made supplication for you that your faith may not
7, 8. (a) In what ways did Peter further test Jesus’ patience? (b) How
did Jesus continue to show a kind, forgiving spirit?
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

333

give out; and you, when once you have returned,
strengthen your brothers.” (Luke 22:32) Jesus thus
expressed con?dence in Peter’s spiritual recovery
and his return to faithful service. What a kind, forgiving spirit!
9

Later, in the garden of Gethsemane, Peter need-

ed correction more than once. Jesus asked him, as
well as James and John, to keep on the watch while
He prayed. Jesus was in emotional agony and in need
of support, but Peter and the others fell asleep repeatedly. Jesus made this empathetic and forgiving
observation: “The spirit, of course, is eager, but the
?esh is weak.”—Mark 14:32-41.
10

Before long, a mob arrived, bearing torches and

armed with swords and clubs. Here was a time to act
with caution and discretion. Yet, Peter rashly leaped
into action, swinging a sword at the head of Malchus,
a slave of the high priest, and lopping o? one of the
man’s ears. Jesus calmly corrected Peter, healed the
wound, and explained a principle of nonviolence that
guides His followers to this day. (Matt. 26:47-55;
9, 10. (a) In the garden of Gethsemane, what correction did Peter
need? (b) Peter’s case may remind us of what?
334

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

Luke 22:47-51; John 18:10, 11) Peter had already given his Master much to forgive. His case may remind
us that we all sin frequently. (Read James 3:2.) Who
of us does not need divine forgiveness every single
day? For Peter, though, the night was far from over.
The worst lay ahead.
11

Peter’s Worst Failure
Jesus reasoned with the mob that if they were

looking for him, they should let his apostles go. Peter watched helplessly as the mob bound Jesus. Then
Peter ?ed, as did his fellow apostles.
12

Peter and John stopped in their ?ight, perhaps

near the house of the former High Priest Annas,
where Jesus was ?rst taken for questioning. As Jesus
was led from there, Peter and John followed but “at
a good distance.” (Matt. 26:58; John 18:12, 13) Peter
was no coward. It surely took a measure of courage
to follow at all. The mob was armed, and Peter had
already wounded one of them. Still, we do not here
see in Peter’s example the kind of loyal love that he
11, 12. (a) How did Peter show a measure of courage after Jesus’ arrest? (b) In what way did Peter’s example fall short of what he himself
had professed?
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

335

himself had professed—a willingness to die by his
Master’s side if need be.—Mark 14:31.
13

Like Peter, many today seek to follow Christ “at

a good distance”—in such a way that no one else will
notice. But as Peter himself later wrote, the only way
to follow Christ properly is to stick as close to Him
as we can, imitating His example in all things, regardless of the consequences.—Read 1 Peter 2:21.
14

Peter’s cautious steps ?nally brought him up to

the gate of one of Jerusalem’s most imposing mansions. It was the home of Caiaphas, the wealthy and
powerful high priest. Such homes were usually built
around a courtyard, with a gate in the front. Peter
reached the gate and was refused entrance. John,
who knew the high priest and was already inside,
came and got the doorkeeper to admit Peter. It
seems that Peter did not stick close to John; nor did
he try to get inside the house to stand at his Master’s side. He stayed in the courtyard, where some
slaves and servants were passing the chilly night
hours in front of a bright ?re, watching as the false
13. What is the only way to follow Christ properly?
14. How did Peter pass the nighttime hours during Jesus’ trial?
336

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

witnesses against Jesus paraded in and out of the
trial going on inside.—Mark 14:54-57; John 18:15,
16, 18.
15

In the ?relight, the girl who had admitted Peter

at the gate was able to see him better. She recognized him. She said accusingly: “You, too, were with
Jesus the Galilean!” Caught o? guard, Peter denied
knowing Jesus—or even understanding what the girl
was talking about. He went to stand near the gatehouse, trying to be inconspicuous, but another girl
noticed him and pointed out the same fact: “This
man was with Jesus the Nazarene.” Peter swore: “I
do not know the man!” (Matt. 26:69-72; Mark 14:6668) Perhaps it was after this second denial that Peter heard a cock crowing, but he was too distracted
to be reminded of the prophecy Jesus had uttered
just hours earlier.
16

A little while later, Peter was still trying desper-

ately to escape notice. But a group of people standing around in the courtyard approached. One of
them was related to Malchus, the slave whom Peter
15, 16. Explain how Jesus’ prophecy about three denials was ful?lled.
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

337

had wounded. He said to Peter: “I saw you in the garden with him, did I not?” Peter felt driven to convince them that they were wrong. So he swore to the
matter, evidently saying that a curse should come
upon him if he was lying. That was Peter’s third denial. No sooner were the words out of his mouth
than a cock crowed—the second one Peter heard
that night.—John 18:26, 27; Mark 14:71, 72.
17

Jesus had just come out onto a balcony overlook-

ing the courtyard. In that moment, described at the
outset of this chapter, his eyes met Peter’s. It dawned
on Peter just how terribly he had failed his Master.
Peter left the courtyard, crushed by the weight of his
own guilt. He headed into the streets of the city, his
way lit by the sinking full moon. The tears welled
up. The sights swam before his eyes. He broke down
and wept bitterly.—Mark 14:72; Luke 22:61, 62.
18

In the wake of such a failure, it is all too easy

for a person to assume that his sin is too terrible for
forgiveness to be possible. Peter may have wondered
as much himself. Was it so?
17, 18. (a) How did Peter react when it dawned on him how terribly he
had failed his Master? (b) What may Peter have wondered?
338

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

19

Was Peter B eyond Forgiveness?
It is hard to imagine the depth of Peter’s pain as

the morning broke and the events of the day unfolded. How he must have reproved himself when Jesus
died later that day after hours of torment! Peter must
have shuddered to think of how he had added to his
Master’s pain on what turned out to be the last day
of His life as a man. Deep though the abyss of his
sadness surely was, Peter did not give in to despair.
We know as much because we soon ?nd him in association with his spiritual brothers again. (Luke 24:
33) No doubt all the apostles regretted how they had
behaved on that dark night, and they brought one another a measure of comfort.
20

In a way, we here see Peter in one of his ?ner

moments. When a servant of God falls, what matters
most is not the depth of his fall but the strength of
his determination to get up again, to set matters
right. (Read Proverbs 24:16.) Peter showed genuine
19. How must Peter have felt about his failure, yet how do we know
that he did not give in to despair?
20. What can we learn from Peter’s actions in one of his ?ner moments?
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

339

faith by gathering with his brothers despite his low
spirits. When one is burdened by sadness or regret,
isolation is tempting but dangerous. (Prov. 18:1) The
wise course is to stay close to fellow believers and
regain spiritual strength.—Heb. 10:24, 25.
21

Because he was with his spiritual brothers, Peter

got to hear the shocking news that Jesus’ body was
not in the tomb. Peter and John ran to the tomb
where Jesus had been buried and the entrance had
been sealed. John, likely a younger man, arrived ?rst.
Finding the entrance of the tomb open, he hesitated. Not Peter. Though he was winded, he went
straight in. It was empty!—John 20:3-9.
22

Did Peter believe that Jesus had been resurrect-

ed? Not at ?rst, even though faithful women reported that angels had appeared to them to announce
that Jesus had risen from the dead. (Luke 23:55–24:
11) But by the end of that day, all traces of sadness
and doubt in Peter’s heart had melted away. Jesus
21. B ecause he had gathered with his spiritual brothers, what news did
Peter hear?
22. What caused all traces of sadness and doubt in Peter’s heart to
melt away?
340

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

lived, now a mighty spirit! He appeared to all his
apostles. He did something else ?rst, though, something private. The apostles said that day: “For a fact
the Lord was raised up and he appeared to Simon!”
(Luke 24:34) Similarly, the apostle Paul later wrote
about that remarkable day when Jesus “appeared to
Cephas, then to the twelve.” (1 Cor. 15:5) Cephas
and Simon are other names for Peter. Jesus appeared
to him that day—evidently when Peter was alone.
23

The details of that touching reunion are left un-

recorded in the Bible. They remain between Jesus
and Peter. We can only imagine how moved Peter
was to see his beloved Lord alive again and to have
an opportunity to express his sorrow and repentance. More than anything in the world, Peter wanted forgiveness. Who can doubt that Jesus extended
it, and in abundance at that? Christians today who
fall into sin need to remember Peter’s case. Never
should we assume that we are beyond the reach of
divine forgiveness. Jesus perfectly re?ects his Father,
who “will forgive in a large way.”—Isa. 55:7.
23. Why do Christians today who fall into sin need to remember Peter’s case?
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

341

Further Proof of Forgiveness
24 Jesus told his apostles to go to Galilee, where
they would meet him again. When they arrived, Peter decided to go out ?shing on the Sea of Galilee.
Several others accompanied him. Once again, Peter
found himself on the lake where he had spent much
of his earlier life. The creaking of the boat, the lapping of the waves, the feel of the coarse nets in his
hands must all have seemed comfortingly familiar.
The men caught no ?sh all that night.—Matt. 26:32;
John 21:1-3.
At dawn, though, a ?gure called from the shore
and urged the ?shermen to cast their nets on the
other side of the boat. They complied and pulled in
a great catch of 153 ?sh! Peter knew who that person was. He leaped from the boat and swam ashore.
On the beach, Jesus gave his faithful friends a meal
of ?sh cooked over charcoal. He focused on Peter.
—John 21:4-14.
25

26

Jesus asked Peter if he loved his Lord “more

24, 25. (a) Describe Peter’s night of ?shing on the Sea of Galilee.
(b) What was Peter’s reaction to Jesus’ miracle the next morning?
26, 27. (a) What opportunity did Jesus give Peter three times? (b) Jesus provided what proof of his full forgiveness of Peter?
342

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

than these”—evidently pointing to the large haul of
?sh. In Peter’s heart, would love for the ?shing business compete with love for Jesus? Just as Peter had
denied his Lord three times, Jesus now gave him the
opportunity to a?rm his love three times before his
fellows. As Peter did so, Jesus told him how to show
that love: by putting sacred service ahead of all
else, feeding, strengthening, and shepherding Christ’s
?ock, His faithful followers.—Luke 22:32; John 21:
15-17.
Jesus thus con?rmed that Peter was still useful
to him and to his Father. Peter would play a valuable role in the congregation under Christ’s direction. What powerful proof of Jesus’ full forgiveness!
Surely that mercy touched Peter, and he took it to
heart.
27

Peter faithfully carried out his assignment for
many years. He strengthened his brothers, as Jesus
had commanded on the eve of His death. Peter
worked kindly and patiently at shepherding and feeding Christ’s followers. The man called Simon came
to live up to the name that Jesus had given him
28

28. How did Peter come to live up to his name?
HE LEARNED FORGIVENESS FROM THE MASTER

343

—Peter, or Rock—by becoming a steady, strong, reliable force for good in the congregation. Much evidence to that e?ect is found in the two warm, personal letters Peter wrote that became valuable books
of the Bible. Those letters show, too, that Peter never forgot the lesson he had learned from Jesus about
forgiveness.—Read 1 Peter 3:8, 9; 4:8.
May we learn that lesson as well. Do we daily
ask God’s forgiveness for our many errors? Do we
then accept that forgiveness and believe in its power to cleanse us? And do we extend forgiveness to
those around us? If we do, we will imitate the faith
of Peter—and the mercy of his Master.
29

29. How can we imitate the faith of Peter and the mercy of his Master?

TO THINK ABOUT . . .
? How did Peter display a faulty view of
forgiveness?
? In what ways did Peter test Jesus’ forgiveness?
? How did Jesus show forgiveness toward Peter?
? In what ways would you like to imitate Peter’s
faith and Jesus’ mercy?

344

IMITATE THEIR FAITH  PETER

Conclusion
“Be imitators of those who through faith and patience
inherit the promises.”—HEBREWS 6:12.

FAITH. It is a beautiful word, one that names a very
appealing quality. However, when we come across
that word, we would do well to think of another one:
“Urgent!” After all, if we do not have faith, we urgently need to acquire it. And if we do have faith,
we urgently need to protect and nourish it. Why?
Imagine that you are traversing a vast desert. You
are in critical need of water. When you ?nd some,
you have to protect it from the sun. Then you need
to be able to replenish your supply so that it will last
you until you arrive at your destination. Today, we
all live in a spiritual desert, a world where genuine
faith—like that water—is rare and tends to evaporate quickly unless it is protected and replenished.
Our need is pressing; just as we cannot live without
2

1, 2. Why is it vital that we build faith now? Illustrate.
345

water, we cannot survive spiritually without faith.
—Rom. 1:17.
Jehovah knows how urgently we need faith, and
he knows how hard it is to build and maintain faith
today. No doubt, that is why he has provided examples for us to imitate. Jehovah inspired the apostle
Paul to write: “Be imitators of those who through
faith and patience inherit the promises.” (Heb. 6:12)
And that is why Jehovah’s organization has encouraged us to work hard to imitate the examples of
faithful men and women, such as those we have considered in these pages. What, though, should we do
now? Let us remember two things: (1) We need to
keep strengthening our faith; (2) we need to keep
our hope clearly in mind.
3

Keep strengthening your faith. Faith has a great enemy—Satan. The ruler of the world has turned this
system of things into a kind of desert that is hostile
to faith. He is far stronger than we are. Should we
despair of developing and strengthening our faith?
4

3. What has Jehovah provided to help us build faith, and what are two
things that we need to remember to do?
4. How has Satan proved to be an enemy of faith, yet why should we
not despair?
346

Never! Jehovah is the great Friend of all who seek
genuine faith. He assures us that with Him on our
side, we can oppose the Devil and even send him
?eeing from us! (Jas. 4:7) We oppose him by taking
time each day to strengthen our faith and build it
up. How?
5

As we have seen, the Bible’s men and women of

faith were not born faithful. They became living
proof that faith is a product of Jehovah’s holy spirit. (Gal. 5:22, 23) They prayed for help, and Jehovah
kept strengthening their faith as a result. Let us do
as they did, never forgetting that Jehovah gives his
spirit generously to those who ask for it and who
work in harmony with their prayers. (Luke 11:13) Is
there more that we can do?
6

In this book, we have discussed only a few exam-

ples of outstanding faith. There are many, many others! (Read Hebrews 11:32.) Each one—in its own
way—o?ers a rich ?eld for prayerful, heartfelt study.
If we merely rush through Bible accounts about
5. How did the Bible’s faithful men and women acquire their faith? Explain.
6. How can we gain the most bene?t from our study of Bible accounts?
347

people of faith, we will not ?rmly establish our own
faith. To bene?t fully from our reading, we need to
spend time digging into the context and the background of Bible accounts. If we always remember
that those imperfect men and women had “feelings
like ours,” their examples will become more real to
us. (Jas. 5:17) With empathy, we can imagine how
they might have felt as they faced challenges and
problems similar to our own.
7

We also fortify our faith through our actions. Af-

ter all, “faith without works is dead.” (Jas. 2:26) Just
imagine how the men and women we have discussed
would rejoice if they were assigned to do the kind of
work that Jehovah has asked us to do today!
8

For example, what if Abraham had been told that

he could worship Jehovah, not at crude altars of
stone erected in the wilderness, but among organized
groups of fellow worshippers in pleasant Kingdom
Halls and at large conventions, where the promises
that he saw only “afar o?” are discussed and ex7-9. (a) How might some of the men and women of faith in Bible times
have felt about worshipping Jehovah in the way that we do today?
(b) Why should we strengthen our faith by actions?
348

plained in glorious detail? (Read Hebrews 11:13.) And
what if Elijah had been told that his work involved,
not executing wicked Baal prophets while he was
trying to serve Jehovah under the rule of a wicked
apostate king, but peacefully visiting people to deliver a message of comfort and hope? Really, would
not the Bible’s men and women of faith have jumped
at the chance to worship Jehovah as we do today?
So let us keep strengthening our faith by actions.
As we do so, we will be making practical application
of the examples of men and women of faith found in
God’s inspired Word. As mentioned in the Introduction, we will come to feel ever closer to them as
friends. However, such friendships may soon become
far more substantial.
9

Keep your hope clearly in mind. Faithful men
and women have always drawn strength from their
God-given hope. Do you? For example, imagine the
joy of meeting faithful servants of God as they return to life in the “resurrection of . . . the righteous.”
(Read Acts 24:15.) What are some questions that you
would like to ask them?
10

10. What joy will we have in Paradise?
349

When you meet Abel, will you be eager to ask
him what his parents were like? Or you might ask:
11

“Did you ever speak to those cherubs guarding the
way to Eden? Did they answer?” What about Noah?
You might ask him: “Were you ever frightened of the
Nephilim? How did you care for all those animals
during that year in the ark?” If you meet Abraham,
you might ask: “Did you have any contact with
Shem? Who taught you about Jehovah? Was it hard
to leave Ur?”
12

Likewise, consider some questions you might

want to ask the faithful women who are resurrected.
“Ruth, what moved you to become a worshipper of
Jehovah?” “Abigail, were you afraid to tell Nabal
about how you had helped David?” “Esther, what
happened to you and Mordecai after the story in the
Bible ended?”
13

Of course, those faithful men and women may be

brimming with questions for you too. What a thrill
11, 12. In the new world, what questions might you ask of (a) Abel?
(b) Noah? (c) Abraham? (d) Ruth? (e) Abigail? (f) Esther?
13. (a) What kind of questions might resurrected ones have for you?
(b) How do you feel about the prospect of meeting faithful men and
women of ancient times?
350

to tell them about the climactic last days and how
Jehovah blessed his people during hard times! No
doubt they will be deeply moved to learn how Jehovah ful?lled all his promises. In those days to come,
it will no longer be a challenge to make God’s loyal
servants in the Bible record come to life in our
minds. They will be there with us, in Paradise! So
keep doing everything you can now to make those
people real to you. Keep imitating their faith. May
you enjoy serving Jehovah along with them as your
dear friends forever!

351

For more information, visit www.jw.org
or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.

