LIVE WITH

J EHOVAH’S DAY
IN MIND

Large-Print Edition

JEHOVAH’S DAY

s

jdlp-E
141225

. . . is a theme that resounds in the last
12 books of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Many people are unfamiliar with
those prophetic books, but in them
you will find practical information
that you can put to use in your daily
life. Do you know how? And how can
these same books help you to prepare
for Jehovah’s great day?

LIVE WITH

J EHOVAH’S DAY
IN MIND
Large-Print Edition

THIS BOOK IS THE PROPERTY OF

? 2007
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY
OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
2007 Printing
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations
are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures
—With References.
Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind—Large Print
English (jdlp-E)
Made in the United States of America

C O N T EN T S

Chapter
SECTION 1

Page
God Can Help You Prepare for His
Great Day

1. Jehovah’s Messages for Then
and Now
2. Prophets Whose Messages Can
A?ect Us

6
19

3. The Day of Jehovah—AVital Theme 37
SECTION 2

Know Jehovah and Serve Him

4. Jehovah—The God Who Foretells
and Ful?lls

55

5. “Seek Jehovah” Through Worship
He Approves

73

6. “Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to
Knowing God

90

7. Serve Jehovah According to His
High Standards

107

SECTION 3

Please God in Your Conduct and Dealings

8. ‘What Is Jehovah Asking
From You?’

126

9. Dealing With Others as God
Desires

145

10. Contribute to Family Life That
Pleases God
SECTION 4

163

Await Jehovah’s Day With Joy

11. Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life
—Do You?
183
12. “Keep in Expectation of It”

202

13. “Proclaim This, You People,
Among the Nations”

219

14. “A Blessing Until There Is No
More Want”

238

S E C T I O N

1

G OD C AN H ELP YOU
P REPARE FOR H IS
G REAT DAY
“The great day of Jehovah is near,” said God’s prophet. (Zephaniah 1:14) That day is fast approaching, so we
need to live with it in mind. Do you realize that the socalled Minor Prophets have something important to say
to you about that great day? Chapters 1 to 3 of this book
will help you to become familiar with those 12 prophets and the themes of their books. Thus you can bene?t
from what they wrote, ?nding lessons that are practical
for your life.

CHAPTER ONE

J EHOVAH’S M ES SAGES FOR
T HEN AND N OW
OVER the years, many people have dreamed of ?nding buried treasures. Have you read historical accounts about explorers, archaeologists, and others
who actually searched for treasures of that sort?
While you might not personally go on such a search,
what if you did ?nd some treasure? How rewarding it
would be if that treasure could improve your life or
make it more enjoyable and successful!
2

Most people never go on literal treasure hunts, but

their quest for happiness may be in striving for money, good health, and a good marriage, treasures not
found by digging in the earth. Nor is there any literal
map showing the way to those treasures. As you know,
e?ort is needed to attain them. That is why many are
grateful for sound advice on how to reach their goals
and make their life more enjoyable and successful.
1, 2. How have some sought hidden treasures, but what can help you to
find enjoyment in life?
6

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

3

You actually have at hand useful advice, guidance

that has already helped others to be happy. The Bible
o?ers the best advice on living, as many have realized.
English author Charles Dickens noted about the Bible:
“It is the best book that ever was or will be known in
the world . . . because it teaches you the best lessons
by which any human creature . . . can possibly be guided.”
4

That observation comes as no surprise to all who

view the Bible as inspired of God. You likely accept
the assurance that we read at 2 Timothy 3:16: “All
Scripture is inspired of God and bene?cial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” In other words, the Bible
contains very helpful information that can show people how to live amid the complexities of the world today. Those who guide their steps by the Bible can
come to have a life that truly is more enjoyable and
successful.
5

Yet, what parts of the Bible come to your mind as

those where you can ?nd that advice? Some may think
3, 4. Where can you ?nd practical advice on how to live?
5-7. To what parts of the Bible might you turn for bene?cial guidance?
Jehovah’s Messages for Then and Now

7

of the Sermon on the Mount, in which Jesus o?ered
e?ective counsel on aspects of daily life. Others will
call to mind the apostle Paul’s writings. And anyone can ?nd helpful counsel in Psalms and Proverbs
—books full of wisdom. In reality, depending on your
situation or the challenges you face, any book of the
Bible can prove useful, even Bible books that are
mainly historical, such as the books from Joshua to
Esther. The history found there contains warning lessons for everyone seeking to be happy in serving God.
(1 Corinthians 10:11) Yes, those books o?er advice
that you can use in guiding your steps, in making your
life successful. Recall this truth: “All the things that
were written aforetime were written for our instruction, that through our endurance and through the
comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.”
—Romans 15:4; Joshua 1:8; 1 Chronicles 28:8, 9.
6

There is, though, a section of the Bible that for

many is virtually unexplored territory where treasures
may be found. This is the group of 12 books often
called the Minor Prophets. These are usually found
after the larger Bible books of Ezekiel and Daniel
8

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

but before Matthew’s Gospel. (Most Bibles have the
12 books in this order: Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah,
Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.) As we have seen, the Bible is inspired of God, and it is useful for teaching and
for showing people how to live. Does that include
these books?
7

It certainly does! In fact, the so-called Minor

Prophets contain riches that are really useful for
showing us how to live today. For insight into why
some people overlook these books, give thought to
what the 12 are called in many languages: the Minor
Prophets. Could that term in itself a?ect how people
view these books? Might it have to some extent even
a?ected your thinking?

ARE THE “MINOR PROPHETS”
REALLY MINOR?
8

The apostle Paul began his letter to the Hebrews:

“God, who long ago spoke on many occasions and in
many ways to our forefathers by means of the prophets,
8. (a) What is an important means by which God has provided direction?
(b) What are the 12 books in question often called, but what is the sense
of the term?
Jehovah’s Messages for Then and Now

9

has at the end of these days spoken to us by means of
a Son.” (Hebrews 1:1, 2) Since God was using human
prophets to convey his messages, we should hardly
view as “minor” any of those messengers or what they
wrote. Nonetheless, the designation “Minor Prophets”
has led some to view the books’ contents as minor and
thus as less important. Others have concluded that the
messages in these books have less authority than other Bible books. In reality, though, the name “Minor
Prophets”1 as used in many languages relates simply
to the fact that these 12 books are shorter than some
others.
9

That a Bible book is short is no indication of its

importance or value to you. The book of Ruth is much
shorter than the books before and after it, yet what
touching information you can ?nd in it! That short
book stresses the attachment we should have to true
worship, illustrates how highly God values women,
1 The Encyclopaedia Judaica observes that this term “seems to be rooted in the Latin designation of the Vulgate (Prophetae Minores). The adjective ‘minor’ in the title ‘Minor Prophets’ does not re?ect upon the
relative importance of the 12 prophets in comparison to Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, but rather upon their much smaller size.”—Volume 12,
page 49.

9. Why is the length of a Bible book no indication of its relative value?
10

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

and provides vital details about Jesus’ lineage. (Ruth
4:17-22) As another example, near the end of the Bible, you will ?nd the book of Jude. It is so short that
in some printed Bibles, it does not ?ll one page. Still,
what priceless information and guidance you ?nd in
it: God’s dealings with wicked angels, warnings about
corrupt men in?ltrating the congregation, and urgings
to put up a hard ?ght for the faith! You can be just as
sure that the books of the so-called Minor Prophets,
while short, are neither minor in content nor minor in
value for you.

PROPHETIC IN WHAT SENSE?
10

Another aspect to consider involves the terms

“prophets” and “prophetic.” These words may bring to
mind the foretelling of the future. Many people think
of a prophet just as one who predicts—perhaps with
mysterious wording open to interpretation—what
the future holds. This a?ects how some view these
12 books.
11

Granted, as you read these 12 books, you quickly

10, 11. (a) How might some react to the term “prophets”? (b) Biblically, who were the prophets, and what did they do?
Jehovah’s Messages for Then and Now

11

see that they abound in predictions, many of them
about the coming of the great day of Jehovah. That accords with the basic sense of the word “prophet.” A
prophet was one who had an intimate relationship
with God and who was often used to reveal what
would come to pass. Starting with Enoch, many Bible
prophets did foretell the future.—1 Samuel 3:1, 11-14;
1 Kings 17:1; Jeremiah 23:18; Acts 3:18; Jude 14, 15.
12

We need to bear in mind, though, that the role of

Jehovah’s prophets was not exclusively that of uttering divine predictions. God often used prophets as
spokesmen to tell others what his will was. For instance, we may not think of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as ones who foretold the future, yet Psalm 105:915 classi?es them as prophets. At times, God used
them to reveal something future, such as when Jacob
blessed his sons. But those patriarchs were also prophets in that they told their family what Jehovah said
about their having a role in God’s purpose. (Genesis
20:7; 49:1-28) Another indication of the scope of the
Biblical term “prophet” is the fact that Aaron served
12. How could you show that being a prophet meant more than foretelling
matters?
12

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

as a prophet for Moses. Aaron carried out the role of
prophet by being a spokesman, or “mouth,” for Moses.—Exodus 4:16; 7:1, 2; Luke 1:17, 76.
13

Think, too, of the prophets Samuel and Nathan.

(2 Samuel 12:25; Acts 3:24; 13:20) Jehovah used both
of them to declare what would occur in the future, but
he also had them serve as prophets in other ways. As
a prophet, Samuel urged the Israelites to turn from
idol worship and resume pure worship. And he declared God’s judgment against King Saul, from which
we can learn that Jehovah values obedience more than
material sacri?ces. Yes, Samuel’s being a prophet included his expressing God’s views about the right way
to live. (1 Samuel 7:3, 4; 15:22) The prophet Nathan
foretold that Solomon would build the temple and
that his kingdom would be ?rmly established. (2 Samuel 7:2, 11-16) But Nathan was also acting as a prophet when he pointed out David’s sin with Bath-sheba
and against Uriah. Who can forget how Nathan exposed David’s adultery—the illustration of a rich man
13, 14. (a) Illustrate that the prophets did more than make predictions.
(b) How can you bene?t from knowing that the prophets o?ered more than
predictions?
Jehovah’s Messages for Then and Now

13

who took a poor man’s beloved and only lamb? Nathan also had a role in arranging true worship at God’s
sanctuary.—2 Samuel 12:1-7; 2 Chronicles 29:25.
14

The point is that we should not think of the

messages in these prophetic books as only predictive
—foretelling the future. They contain divine expressions about many other things, including excellent insights into how God’s people back then were supposed
to live and how we today should live. In fact, we are
assured that what we ?nd in the Bible, including these
12 books, is very useful and practical, helping people
to see the best way to live. These inspired books o?er
us valuable guidance that can help us “to live with
soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things.”—Titus 2:12.

HOW TO BENEFIT
15

There are many ways in which we can bene?t from

reading God’s inspired Word. Some Bible books tell us
what occurred at a certain time, and others are poetic, each with unique value. In still others, the ?gura15, 16. (a) What ?gurative element can be found in the “Minor Prophets”? (b) What prophetic pictures are contained in those books?
14

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

tive, or symbolic, element comes to the fore, as is so
with these 12 books. For example, Jesus was drawing
on the book of Jonah when He said: “A wicked and
adulterous generation keeps on seeking for a sign, but
no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah the
prophet. For just as Jonah was in the belly of the huge
?sh three days and three nights, so the Son of man will
be in the heart of the earth three days and three
nights. Men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment
with this generation and will condemn it; because they
repented at what Jonah preached, but, look! something more than Jonah is here.”—Matthew 12:39-41.
16

Clearly, Jesus saw in the book of Jonah much

more than a historical record of God’s dealings with
Jonah, the prophet’s activity in Nineveh, and the result when Jonah proclaimed God’s warning message.
Jesus realized that the prophet Jonah served in a ?gurative role, pointing to Jesus Christ, to his dying and
then being raised on the third day. Furthermore, the
Ninevites’ reaction o?ered a contrast—a contrast to
how most Jews responded to Jesus’ preaching and
works. (Matthew 16:4) Accordingly, we understand
Jehovah’s Messages for Then and Now

15

that these 12 books contain prophetic pictures, or correspondencies, of God’s dealings with his people in
modern times. Such studies are fascinating and valuable.1
17

However, the approach of the volume you have in

your hands is not a study of the ?gurative, or symbolic, meaning of the book of Jonah nor of the other
11 books. Neither is the approach that of a verse-byverse analysis. Rather, the focus is primarily on information in these books that we can apply in our daily
life. Ask yourself: ‘In these 12 books, what useful advice or divine counsel does Jehovah provide for me?
How can these books help me to “live with soundness
of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid
this present system of things”? What do they tell me
about Christian living, morality, family life, and attitudes in these critical days, since “the day of Jehovah
is coming, for it is near”?’ (Titus 2:12; Joel 2:1; 2 Timothy 3:1) As you ?nd satisfying answers, you will likely discover verses that you will treasure, verses that
1 See, for example, the treatment of Haggai and Zechariah in Paradise
Restored to Mankind—By Theocracy! published by Jehovah’s Witnesses
but now out of print.

17. This volume takes what approach to the 12 books?
16

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

you have not heretofore employed when sharing Bible counsel with others. In this way, your storehouse
of valuable Bible passages is certain to grow.—Luke
24:45.
18

The chapters of this volume are grouped into four

sections. Try to get an overview of each section as you
begin it. In each of the following 13 chapters, you will
?nd two boxes designed to help you ?x in mind what
you have covered. The questions in those boxes will
allow you to go over in your mind what you have
read and to re?ect on its value and application. The
?rst box is located about halfway through the chapter. When you reach that box, consider the questions
therein. Doing so will help you to implant deeply in
your heart what you have just studied. (Matthew 13:
8, 9, 23; 15:10; Luke 2:19; 8:15) The second box will allow you to re?ect on what you have read in the ?nal
part of that chapter and to secure it in your store of
knowledge. So take time to study these boxes. They
can truly be tools to reveal practical ways that you can
bene?t from what you are considering.
18. What is the arrangement of this volume, and how can you bene?t from
this?
Jehovah’s Messages for Then and Now

17

BENEFITS FOR YOU
? What misconceptions about the “Minor
Prophets” will you want to avoid?
—Romans 15:4.
? Why can you expect to bene?t from
examining the 12 prophetic books?
—2 Timothy 3:16.
? What can you look forward to as you consider these books?—1 Thessalonians 2:13.
19

To set the stage, so to speak, for what will follow,

ask yourself what you know about the contents of
each of these 12 books. Through whom did God provide these messages, and what kind of men were they?
In what time periods did they live, and in what situations did they serve? (The time line on pages 26 and
27 will prove to be very helpful; consult it often as you
study the subsequent chapters.) What was the immediate message or application, and how can knowing
this help you to see the material in context? The following chapter will help you to answer these key questions.
19. What should you ?rst ?x in mind about the 12 books?
18

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER TWO

P ROPHETS W HO SE M ES SAGES
C AN A FFECT U S
WOULD you like to get to know 12 messengers of God?
These particular 12 lived before Jesus walked the earth,
so you cannot meet them face-to-face. Still, you can get
to know them, noting how they kept close in mind “the
great day of Jehovah.” And what you will learn is truly
of signi?cance to every Christian who is rightly striving
to keep Jehovah’s great day in mind.—Zephaniah 1:14;
2 Peter 3:12.
2

There are scores of men called prophets in the Scrip-

tures—many Bible books bear the names of prophets.
As with the other prophets, the 12 men we will consider are examples of faithfulness and courage. Some of
them experienced the elation of seeing their message
change hearts and minds, leading people back to God.
Others experienced bitter disappointment when they
saw wayward ones violate Jehovah’s standards and work
1. Why should you be interested in the 12 prophets who wrote the last
books of the Hebrew Scriptures?
2, 3. How can we relate to the experiences of the 12 prophets?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

19

against his will. Some of these 12 felt the frustrating effects of complacency and self-indulgence on the part of
professed worshippers of Jehovah around them.
3

Like us, these 12 prophets lived in times marked by

political unrest, social upheaval, and religious decline.
Since they were men “with feelings like ours,” they must
have had their own fears and challenges. (James 5:17)
Yet, they set good examples for us, and their messages
should be remembered, being recorded in the “prophetic scriptures” for the bene?t of us “upon whom the ends
of the systems of things have arrived.”—Romans 15:4;
16:26; 1 Corinthians 10:11.

12 PROPHETS IN THEIR TIMES
4

You might think that the sequence in which the

books of Hosea through Malachi appear in your Bible
re?ects the chronological order in which these prophets
lived. That is not the case. For instance, the prophets
Jonah, Joel, Amos, Hosea, and Micah all lived in the
ninth and eighth centuries B.C.E.1 During that period,
1 Compare this with the time line found on pages 26 and 27. You will
see from it, for example, that both Micah and Hosea served during a period when Isaiah was a prophet of God in Jerusalem.

4. What have you noted regarding the order in which the 12 prophets lived,
and which ones did Jehovah ?rst raise up to warn and motivate his people?
20

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

many kings in both the southern kingdom of Judah and
the northern kingdom of Israel were unfaithful. And
their subjects followed suit, earning God’s wrath. It was
at this time that the Assyrians and later the Babylonians
sought to attain world domination. Little did the Israelites realize that Jehovah would use these two world
powers as his executioners! You are aware, though, that
God had constantly alerted Israel and Judah by means
of faithful prophets.
5

As the time for his judgment on Judah and Jeru-

salem drew closer, Jehovah raised up another group
of forceful spokesmen. Who were in this group? The
prophets Zephaniah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Obadiah.
They all were active during the seventh century B.C.E.
The most tragic events marking that period were the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians in 607 B.C.E.
and the exiling of the Jews. Again, it was just as God
had warned in prophecies uttered by some of these very
men whom he had sent to speak for him. They had
tried to alert the people to things that were wrong,
such as getting drunk and carrying on violence, but the
5. What group of prophets proclaimed Jehovah’s judgment as Judah and
Jerusalem faced desolation?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

21

people would not change.—Habakkuk 1:2, 5-7; 2:15-17;
Zephaniah 1:12, 13.
6

After God’s people returned from exile, they needed

competent leadership as well as comfort and admonition to stay focused on true worship. Another group of
prophets—Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi—?lled that
need. They served in the sixth and ?fth centuries B.C.E.
As you learn more about these 12 stalwart defenders of
Jehovah’s sovereignty and about their work, you will
discern important lessons that you can apply in your
ministry during our perilous times. Let us now consider these prophets in the general order in which they
served.

STRUG GLING TO RES CUE
STUBB ORN NATIONS
7

Have you ever experienced a crisis of con?dence,

perhaps feeling that your faith is waning? If so, Jonah’s experiences are particularly valuable to you. Jonah lived in the ninth century B.C.E. You likely know
that God assigned Jonah to go to Nineveh, the capital of
6. How did Jehovah motivate the remnant who returned from exile?
7, 8. How can Jonah’s experiences encourage us to deal with any lack of
con?dence?
22

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

the ascending Assyrian Empire. Jonah was to denounce
the wickedness of the Ninevites. However, instead of
going to his assignment—about 550 miles northeast of
Jerusalem—Jonah boarded a ship bound for a port that
was probably in Spain. Yes, he was headed 2,200 miles
in the opposite direction! What do you think? Was Jonah moved by fear, a temporary lapse of faith, or even
resentment against any repentance the Ninevites might
show and thereafter be able to express their aggression
against Israel? The Bible does not tell us speci?cally.
But we can see why we need to guard against letting our
thinking go astray.
8

You know how Jonah reacted to God’s censure.

When Jonah was inside “a great ?sh” that had swallowed him, he acknowledged: “Salvation belongs to Jehovah.” (Jonah 1:17; 2:1, 2, 9) Once miraculously rescued, Jonah carried out his commission, only to be
gravely disappointed when Jehovah held back from destroying the Ninevites because they heeded Jonah’s
message and repented. Jehovah again lovingly corrected the prophet, who had displayed self-centeredness.
And though some might focus on Jonah’s lapses, God
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

23

counted him worthy as an obedient and faithful servant.—Luke 11:29.
9

Were you ever frustrated when people maligned

your Bible-based message as alarmist? The message
of the prophet Joel, whose name means “Jehovah Is
God,” was viewed similarly by his countrymen. He appears to have recorded his prophecies in Judah about
820 B.C.E., in the days of King Uzziah. The services of
Joel and of Jonah seem to have overlapped. Joel spoke
of a plague of destructive locusts that would come in
waves to desolate the land. Yes, God’s fear-inspiring day
was near at hand. You will ?nd, however, that Joel’s
message was not all doom. On a positive note, he indicated that the faithful ‘would prove to be escaped ones.’
(Joel 2:32) Repentant ones can rejoice over Jehovah’s
blessing and forgiveness. How reassuring it should be
for us to bear in mind that this is part of our message
too! Joel foretold that God’s active force, his holy spirit, would be poured out “on every sort of ?esh.” Do
you see how you are involved in that prophecy? And
Joel stressed the only sure way of salvation: “Everyone
9. What bene?ts can you draw from Joel’s prophetic message?
24

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

who calls on the name of Jehovah will get away safe.”
—Joel 2:28, 32.
10

You can feel for Amos if you are sometimes struck

by the gravity of the message we are to proclaim, usually to individuals who do not respond. Amos was neither
the son of a prophet nor a part of a group of prophets;
he was but a sheepherder and a seasonal laborer. He
prophesied during the time of King Uzziah of Judah,
close to the end of the ninth century B.C.E. Despite his
humble origin, Amos (whose name means “Being a
Load; Carrying a Load”) carried weighty messages directed at Judah, Israel, and surrounding nations. Does
it not encourage you to know that Jehovah can enable
an average man to do such signi?cant work?
11

Have you ever asked yourself, ‘What sacri?ces

would I be willing to make to do Jehovah’s will?’ Think
of Hosea, who lived about the time of Isaiah and Micah
and who served as a prophet for some 60 years. Jehovah
instructed Hosea to marry Gomer, “a wife of fornication.” (Hosea 1:2) Of the three children Gomer later bore, apparently only one was Hosea’s. Why would
10. How did Jehovah use a mere seasonal laborer?
11. To what extent was Hosea willing to go in doing God’s will?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

25

12 Prophets

Kings of Judah*
Kings of Israel*
*Kings who ruled more than two years

Contemporary Prophets
Other Contemporaries

Jonah

Hosea
Joel

/

Amos
850 B.C.E.

825

800

Amaziah

Uzziah (Azariah)
Zechariah

Jeroboam II
&

Menahem

&
Destruction of Nineveh, 632

Zephaniah
/

Nahum
700

675

650
Josiah

Manasseh

/

&

&
Fall of Babylon, 539
Return of Exiles, 537

Haggai
Zechariah

Daniel
/

Temple Rebuilt, 515
550

26

//

525

/

500

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Fall of Samaria, 740

Micah
Isaiah
/

750
Jotham

Ahaz

Pekah

725

700

Hezekiah

Hoshea

/

&

Habakkuk
Obadiah

Destruction of Jerusalem, 607

Jeremiah
Daniel
Ezekiel

/
Jehoiakim

600

575

550

Zedekiah

/

&
Walls Rebuilt, 455
Ezra
Nehemiah

Malachi
/

450

Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

425

400

27

Jehovah ask anyone to endure the indignity of spousal
in?delity? Jehovah was teaching a lesson in loyalty and
forgiveness. The northern kingdom had betrayed God
as an adulterous wife does her husband. Still, Jehovah
would show his love for his people and try to help them
repent, which certainly is heartwarming for us to consider.
12

Do you not agree that today’s critical times chal-

lenge you in developing boldness and complete reliance
on Jehovah? If you manifest these qualities, you will be
like Micah. A contemporary of Hosea and Isaiah, Micah
declared messages against the nations of Judah and Israel during the reigns of Judaean Kings Jotham, Ahaz,
and Hezekiah, in the eighth century B.C.E. Extreme
moral corruption and idolatry had de?led Israel to the
north, which su?ered destruction when Samaria fell to
the Assyrians in 740 B.C.E. Judah wavered between obedience and unfaithfulness to Jehovah. Despite foreboding events, Micah could draw comfort in seeing his
God-given message temporarily stall Judah’s plunge
into spiritual corruption and eventual disaster. How
12. How can you bene?t from considering the example of Micah and the
e?ects of his prophesying?
28

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

comforting it is for us to see that some do respond positively to our message of salvation!

ANTICIPATING A GATHERING STORM
13

As the Egyptian and the Assyrian world pow-

ers were fading, Babylon was becoming more prominent. Its ascendancy would soon have dramatic e?ects
on the nation of Judah. God’s prophets were on hand to
warn and admonish Jehovah’s worshippers. Consider
some of those prophets, bearing in mind that Christians
today similarly preach a warning message.
14

If you have had to break from family traditions to

do Jehovah’s will, you can sympathize with Zephaniah. It may be that he was a great-great-grandson of
King Hezekiah and a relative of King Josiah—thus a
member of Judah’s royal house. Yet, Zephaniah obediently carried a message of denunciation against the corrupt leadership in Judah. His name means “Jehovah
Has Concealed.” He stressed that only by God’s mercy
might one “be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger.” (Zephaniah 2:3) Happily, Zephaniah’s courageous
13, 14. (a) How can Zephaniah’s example help you in your worship?
(b) What spiritual reform did Zephaniah’s activity help bring about?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

29

HOW CAN YOU BENEFIT?
? What have you noted about the way the
12 prophets are listed in the Bible?
? How can you bene?t from the experiences
of such prophets as Jonah and Amos?
—Hebrews 11:32, 33, 39, 40.
? How far was Hosea willing to go in order
to do Jehovah’s will?—Matthew 16:24.
proclamation bore fruit. Young King Josiah led a spiritual reform, removing the idols, repairing the temple,
and restoring pure worship. (2 Kings, chapters 22-23)
Zephaniah and his fellow prophets (Nahum and Jeremiah) must have been instrumental in assisting or advising the king. Sadly, most of the Jews repented only
super?cially. After Josiah died in battle, they returned
to idolatry. Before many years had passed, they were
taken into Babylonian captivity.
15

You may feel that you are of no account, not one

who is in the limelight. Christians have the great privilege of being “fellow workers” of God, yet personally
15. (a) Why did Nineveh deserve the adverse message delivered by Nahum? (b) What can you learn from what happened to Nineveh?
30

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

most do not enjoy great prominence. (1 Corinthians
3:9) Similarly, we know nothing more about the prophet Nahum than that he was from a small town called
Elkosh, possibly in Judah. His message, though, was
weighty and important. How so? Nahum prophesied
against the capital of the Assyrian Empire, Nineveh. Its
people had responded favorably to Jonah’s work, but after a while they returned to their old ways. Stone carvings from the site of ancient Nineveh show that it was,
as Nahum stated, a “city of bloodshed.” (Nahum 3:1)
Those carvings illustrate the cruel treatment meted out
to prisoners of war. In descriptive and dramatic language, Nahum foretold the complete annihilation of
Nineveh. His message proved true, as will the message
that we bear today.
16

Over the centuries, some Bible readers have had

unful?lled expectations regarding the day of Jehovah. Others might be frustrated by the seeming delay of God’s judgment. How do you feel? Habakkuk
expressed his understandable concerns, asking: “How
long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, and you do not
16, 17. If our expectations about the end have not yet been fully met, what
can we learn from the case of Habakkuk?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

31

hear? . . . Why are despoiling and violence in front of
me?”—Habakkuk 1:2, 3.
17

Habakkuk prophesied during a troubled period of

Judaean history, after the reign of good King Josiah but
before Jerusalem’s destruction in 607 B.C.E. Injustice
and violence were rampant. Habakkuk warned that siding with Egypt would not spare Judah from the bloodthirsty Babylonians. He wrote in vibrant and dramatic
style, o?ering the comforting thought that “as for the
righteous one, by his faithfulness he will keep living.”
(Habakkuk 2:4) Those words must be really important
for us, since the apostle Paul quoted them in three
books of the Christian Greek Scriptures. (Romans 1:17;
Galatians 3:11; Hebrews 10:38) Furthermore, through
Habakkuk, Jehovah o?ers us the assurance: “The vision
is yet for the appointed time . . . It will not be late.”
—Habakkuk 2:3.
18

The prophet Obadiah has the distinction of pen-

ning the shortest book of the Hebrew Scriptures—just
21 verses. All we know about him is that he prophesied
against Edom. The Edomites descended from Jacob’s
18. Why did Jehovah direct Obadiah to prophesy against Edom?
32

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

brother, thus being the Israelites’ ‘brothers.’ (Deuteronomy 23:7) But Edom had treated God’s people in a very
unbrotherly fashion. In 607 B.C.E., about when Obadiah wrote his book, they blocked the roads and handed
?eeing Jews over to the enemy Babylonians. Jehovah
foretold the complete desolation of Edom, a prophecy
that was ful?lled. As with Nahum, we may know little
about Obadiah, but how encouraging it is to realize that
God can use seemingly insigni?cant ones as His messengers!—1 Corinthians 1:26-29.

MOTIVATING, COMFORTING, AND WARNING
19

Haggai is the ?rst of three prophets who served af-

ter a faithful remnant returned from Babylonian exile
in 537 B.C.E. Haggai may have been in the ?rst group of
returnees. With Governor Zerubbabel and High Priest
Joshua and in cooperation with the prophet Zechariah,
Haggai tried to motivate the Jews to overcome external
opposition and their own apathy linked to materialism. They needed to accomplish what they had come
back for: the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple. Haggai’s
four straightforward messages, given in 520 B.C.E.,
19. How did Haggai help to invigorate God’s people?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

33

emphasized Jehovah’s name and sovereignty. As you
read the book, you will ?nd the expression “Jehovah of
armies” 14 times. Haggai’s forceful messages stimulated the people to resume their temple building. Are you
not similarly invigorated by knowing that Jehovah has
unlimited power as Sovereign Ruler and that he commands vast armies of spirit creatures?—Isaiah 1:24; Jeremiah 32:17, 18.
20

You may at times be disheartened by a lack of zeal

evident in some who have served God. Then you can
identify with the prophet Zechariah. Like his contemporary Haggai, he faced the challenge of stirring up fellow
worshippers to keep at the work until the temple was
completed. Zechariah worked hard to strengthen the
people to tackle that monumental task. In the face of
the self-indulgent attitude of the people around him, he
strove to stimulate strong faith and corresponding action. And he was successful. Zechariah recorded numerous prophecies about the Christ. We too can draw
strength from the message that “Jehovah of armies” will
not forget people who seek his favor.—Zechariah 1:3.
20. What prevailing attitude did Zechariah ?ght against?
34

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

IN EXPECTATION OF THE MES SIAH
21

The last of the 12 prophets, Malachi, lived up to

his name, which means “My Messenger.” We know
little about this prophet, who lived in the mid-?fth
century B.C.E. From his prophecy, however, we do
know that he was a fearless spokesman who rebuked
God’s people for their sins and hypocrisy. The conditions that Malachi described are very similar to
those depicted by Nehemiah, likely a contemporary
of Malachi. Why was Malachi’s message sorely needed? The zeal and enthusiasm that the prophets Zechariah and Haggai had stimulated some decades earlier had faded. The Jews’ spiritual state was at a very
low ebb. Malachi spoke boldly against haughty and
hypocritical priests, and he criticized the people for
the halfhearted worship and the sacri?ces that they
were o?ering. Yet, just as God’s Word assures us of
a bright outlook for the future, Malachi foretold the
coming of the Messiah’s precursor, John the Baptist,
and afterward of Christ himself. Malachi’s message
21. (a) Why was Malachi’s message sorely needed? (b) With what assurance does the book of Malachi bring the Hebrew Scriptures to a close?
Prophets Whose Messages Can Affect Us

35

POINTS YOU CAN USE
? As shown in the case of Zephaniah, what
e?ect can God’s servants have on others?
? Why is Habakkuk’s message especially
applicable today?—2 Peter 3:12.
? How is Jehovah’s graciousness toward
lowly ones illustrated in the case of some
of the prophets?—Psalm 113:1, 6, 7;
Isaiah 57:15.
closes the Hebrew Scriptures on a positive note,
promising us that “the sun of righteousness will certainly shine forth” for those in fear of God’s name.
—Malachi 4:2, 5, 6.
22

You can see that the men who wrote the last

12 books of the Hebrew Scriptures had faith and conviction. (Hebrews 11:32; 12:1) Their example and
message can teach us valuable lessons as we eagerly look forward to “Jehovah’s day.” (2 Peter 3:10)
Consider now how these prophetic messages can affect your eternal future!
22. What are your observations regarding the character and the message
of the 12 prophets?
36

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER THREE

T HE DAY OF J EHOVAH
—A V ITAL T HEME
“THE great day of Jehovah is near. It is near, and
there is a hurrying of it very much.” (Zephaniah 1:
14) God’s prophets time and again warned of the approaching day of Jehovah. Usually, they pointed out
how its coming should a?ect people’s daily life, their
morals, and their conduct. Urgency was always attached to their proclamations. If you had heard these
messages with your own ears, how would you have
reacted?
2

In reading the 12 prophets, you will ?nd that they

all, directly or indirectly, spoke of the day of Jehovah.1 Thus, before considering in the following
chapters the valuable information that these prophets
delivered, think of the recurring theme: the day of
1 Both Isaiah, a contemporary of the ?rst group of these 12 prophets,
and Ezekiel, a contemporary of the second group, also warned about
the day of Jehovah.—Isaiah 13:6, 9; Ezekiel 7:19; 13:5; see Chapter 2 of
this book, paragraphs 4-6.

1, 2. (a) To what vital theme do all 12 prophets point? (b) How did some
of the 12 prophets make direct mention of the day of Jehovah?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

37

Jehovah. Six of the prophets directly used that expression or similar terms. Joel graphically described “the
great and fear-inspiring day of Jehovah.” (Joel 1:15; 2:
1, 2, 30-32) Amos told the Israelites to get ready to
meet their God, for the day of Jehovah would be
one of darkness. (Amos 4:12; 5:18) Later, Zephaniah
spoke the words quoted in paragraph 1. And near
the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, Obadiah
warned: “The day of Jehovah against all the nations
is near.”—Obadiah 15.
3

You will also see that two prophets who were sent

to the Jews after their return from exile used similar
expressions. Zechariah told of the day when all nations coming against Jerusalem would be annihilated.
He described vividly what would take place on “one
day that is known as belonging to Jehovah.” (Zechariah 12:9; 14:7, 12-15) And Malachi alerted God’s people to the coming of “the great and fear-inspiring day
of Jehovah.”—Malachi 4:1-5.
4

Though not using the expression “the day of Jeho-

3. Why can we say that the prophets after the exile dealt with the topic of
Jehovah’s day?
4. How do some of the 12 prophets refer to the day of Jehovah?
38

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

vah,” the others of the 12 alluded to that day. Hosea talked of Jehovah’s settling accounts with Israel and later with Judah. (Hosea 8:13, 14; 9:9; 12:2)
These messages often related to what Jehovah did
back in those days. For example, Jonah proclaimed
God’s judgment on Nineveh, and Micah described
what would happen when God acted against rebellious peoples. (Jonah 3:4; Micah 1:2-5) Nahum promised that Jehovah would take vengeance on His adversaries. (Nahum 1:2, 3) Habakkuk cried out for justice
and described “the day of distress.” (Habakkuk 1:
1-4, 7; 3:16) Some messages in these books de?nitely pointed to developments that would involve true
Christians. For instance, Haggai, one of the postexilic prophets, foretold the rocking of the nations. (Haggai 2:6, 7) The apostle Paul quoted from the words of
Haggai 2:6 to urge Christians to be in a ?t condition
when God removes the symbolic wicked heaven.—Hebrews 12:25-29; Revelation 21:1.

THE DAY OF JEHOVAH—WHAT IS IT?
5

You have good reason to wonder what the day of

5, 6. According to the prophets, what will the day of Jehovah be like?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

39

Jehovah will be like. You may ask, ‘Does the day of
Jehovah have any bearing on how I live now and on
my future?’ As the prophets indicated, the day of Jehovah is a period when Jehovah acts against his enemies to execute judgment, a day of battle. That
fear-inspiring day will likely be a day of celestial phenomena. “Sun and moon themselves will certainly
become dark, and the very stars will actually withdraw their brightness.” (Joel 2:2, 11, 30, 31; 3:15;
Amos 5:18; 8:9) What will happen on the earth,
where we live? Micah stated: “The mountains must
melt under [Jehovah], and the low plains themselves
will split apart, like wax because of the ?re, like waters being poured down a steep place.” (Micah 1:4)
This description may be ?gurative, but we can conclude from it that God’s acts will bring disastrous
e?ects on the earth and its inhabitants. Not on all
humans, though. The same prophets pointed to abundant blessings for those who “search for what is
good” and thus keep living.—Amos 5:14; Joel 3:17,
18; Micah 4:3, 4.
40

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

6

Others of the 12 prophets painted more graphic

pictures of the day of Jehovah. Habakkuk vividly portrayed how Jehovah will smash “the eternal
mountains” and bring low “the inde?nitely lasting
hills,” ?tting representations of human organizations, which might seem enduring. (Habakkuk 3:6-12)
Yes, the day of Jehovah “is a day of fury, a day of
distress and of anguish, a day of storm and of desolation, a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of
clouds and of thick gloom.”—Zephaniah 1:14-17.
7

Imagine what a scourge will come upon those

?ghting against God! “There will be a rotting away
of one’s ?esh, while one is standing upon one’s feet;
and one’s very eyes will rot away in their sockets,
and one’s very tongue will rot away in one’s mouth.”
(Zechariah 14:12) Whether this vision will be ful?lled literally or not, you can tell that it portends
tragedy for many. At the very least, the tongues of
God’s enemies will rot in the sense that their de?ant speech will be silenced. And any vision of taking
uni?ed action against God’s people will be blurred.
7. What scourge is foretold, and how might it be ful?lled?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

41

WHY A G OD OF LOVE ACTS
8

You may have heard people ask: ‘How can a lov-

ing God bring such a disaster upon his enemies? Does
God have to wreak havoc on the earth? Did not Jesus urge continuing to love even enemies and thus
proving to be sons of the Father in the heavens?’
(Matthew 5:44, 45) In response, you might direct attention to the very beginning of mankind’s troubles.
God created the ?rst human couple in his image and
likeness—they were perfect. Yet, they introduced sin
and death into the human family and thus into our
life. They took sides with Satan the Devil on the issue of who has the supreme right to rule mankind.
(Genesis 1:26; 3:1-19) Over the centuries, Satan has
tried to prove that if humans are given an incentive
to do otherwise, they will not serve Jehovah. You
know that Satan has failed. Jesus Christ and many
other servants of Jehovah have kept integrity to God
and have shown that they serve him out of love. (Hebrews 12:1-3) Can you not think of many by name
who are thus serving God loyally?
8, 9. (a) To understand why Jehovah acts against the wicked, what should
you consider? (b) How is your loyalty in daily life linked to Jehovah’s taking action?
42

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

9

Moreover, you are involved in this issue that will

end in Jehovah’s eliminating wickedness. For example, as you read these 12 books, you will note that
some of the prophets drew attention to the luxurious
lifestyle of people who were neglecting the worship
of Jehovah. The prophets admonished God’s people
to ‘set their heart upon their ways’ and to transform
their lives. (Haggai 1:2-5; 2:15, 18; Amos 3:14, 15; 5:
4-6) Yes, the prophets were showing the people how
to live. Those who accepted that exhortation showed
that Jehovah is their Sovereign, thereby proving Satan a liar. Jehovah will prove loyal to such ones when
he annihilates his enemies.—2 Samuel 22:26.
10

There is another reason for God to act. Turn your

attention back to the eighth century B.C.E. when Micah prophesied in Judah. Speaking as if he were the
nation, he likens the situation to a vineyard or an orchard after the harvest, with no leftover grapes or
?gs. That was how it was in Judaean society, where
upright ones could hardly be found. Israelites were
hunting their fellow citizens, lying in wait to shed
blood. Their leaders and judges were out for sel?sh
10. How does what Micah observed add reason for Jehovah to take action?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

43

gain. (Micah 7:1-4) If you lived in that kind of situation, how would you feel? Likely, you would feel compassion for the innocent victims. Thus, how much
more Jehovah feels for the oppressed! Today Jehovah
scrutinizes mankind. What do you think he ?nds? Oppressors are viciously taking advantage of others and
violently attacking their neighbors. As for loyal ones,
they are relatively few compared with the world population. But we need not despair. Out of love for the
victims, Jehovah will render justice.—Ezekiel 9:4-7.
11

Clearly, Jehovah’s day means destruction for his

enemies and deliverance for those who fear and serve
him.1 Micah foretold that nations would stream to
the mountain of Jehovah’s house, resulting in worldwide peace and unity. (Micah 4:1-4) Back in that
time, did the fact that the prophets were proclaiming the day of Jehovah make any di?erence in people’s lives? For some, it did. Recall that when Jonah
proclaimed a judgment against Nineveh, the violent,
1 For additional evidence of this positive aspect, please read Hosea
6:1; Joel 2:32; Obadiah 17; Nahum 1:15; Habakkuk 3:18, 19; Zephaniah
2:2, 3; Haggai 2:7; Zechariah 12:8, 9; and Malachi 4:2.

11. (a) The day of Jehovah means what to those who fear him? (b) How
did Jonah’s warning message a?ect the Ninevites?
44

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

WHAT HAVE YOU LEARNED?
? To what vital topic do all 12 prophets make
reference?—Joel 1:15; Zephaniah 1:7, 14.
? What will the day of Jehovah be like?
—Joel 2:30, 31; Zechariah 14:12.
? Why would a loving God take action
against the wicked, as if on one day?
—Micah 7:2-4; Hebrews 12:1-3.
wicked inhabitants of that city “began to put faith in
God” and “turned back from their bad way.” As a result, Jehovah refrained from causing calamity then.
(Jonah 3:5, 10) The message about the impending day
of Jehovah’s judgment did a?ect the lives of the Ninevites!

HOW D OES THAT DAY AFFECT YOU?
12

‘But those prophets lived centuries ago,’ some-

one might object. ‘What do their messages about Jehovah’s day have to do with me?’ Granted, those
prophets lived many years even before Jesus’ birth,
12, 13. (a) About whom did the 12 prophesy? (b) Why can we say that
the prophetic words of the 12 pointed considerably forward in time?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

45

yet we should consider how their words about Jehovah’s day are relevant in the 21st century. What practical bene?ts can we derive from what they said about
Jehovah’s great day? There is a key to seeing the relevance and bene?ting from their message. It is our
recognizing that the prophets warned of Jehovah’s
day against Israel, Judah, surrounding nations, and
certain world powers of the day.1 The point is that
such prophecies were ful?lled! The Assyrians did invade Samaria, Judah was desolated in 607 B.C.E., and
the surrounding hostile nations were soon devastated. Eventually, the Assyrian and Babylonian world
powers fell, all in ful?llment of speci?c prophecies.
13

Now turn your thoughts to the day of Pente-

cost 33 C.E., long after many of those prophecies saw
their ?rst ful?llments. On that day, the apostle Peter
applied Joel’s prophecy to the pouring out of God’s
holy spirit. Then Peter quoted from the book of Joel:
“The sun will be turned into darkness and the moon
into blood before the great and illustrious day of Jehovah arrives.” (Acts 2:20) This shows that there
1 Some of the 12 prophesied against, not just one nation, but a number of nations.
46

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

would be still further ful?llments of the prophecies
about the day of Jehovah. As for Joel’s prophecy, it
had a second ful?llment in 70 C.E. when the Roman
army destroyed Jerusalem, certainly a time of darkness and blood.
14

However, Joel’s prophecy and other prophecies

about the day of Jehovah are yet to have a ?nal ful?llment, which applies to us living in the 21st century. How so? Peter admonished Christians to keep
“close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah.”
The apostle went on to say: “There are new heavens
and a new earth that we are awaiting according to
his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”
(2 Peter 3:12, 13) No new heavens (a new theocratic
government) with a new earth (a society of righteous
people under that government) was established right
after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 C.E. So the
prophetic words about the day of Jehovah must have
another ful?llment. Yes, these prophecies concern us
today, who are living in “critical times”!—2 Timothy
3:1.
14, 15. (a) Why can we say that the prophecies about the day of Jehovah
concern us today? (b) When can we expect the day of Jehovah to take place?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

47

15

The combined description of Jehovah’s day as

presented in these 12 Bible books makes us think of
Jesus Christ’s words: “There will be great tribulation
such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning
until now, no, nor will occur again.” He said that “immediately after” the beginning of that great tribulation, “the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not
give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and
the powers of the heavens will be shaken.” (Matthew
24:21, 29) This helps us to pinpoint the timing of the
day of Jehovah. It is just ahead. The Scriptures indicate that the great tribulation will destroy “Babylon
the Great,” the world empire of false religion. Then,
as the climax of the great tribulation, Jehovah’s day
will wipe God’s enemies o? the face of the earth.
—Revelation 17:5, 12-18; 19:11-21.
16

Jehovah’s Witnesses have discerned the nature of

ful?llments of prophecies about Jehovah’s day. Often
and in various ways, apostate Jerusalem, renegade Samaria, the hostile Edomites, the violent Assyrians,
and the Babylonians pre?gured aspects of false reli16. In what major way will prophecies about the day of Jehovah be ful?lled?
48

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

gion. All such religion will be destroyed in the initial
phase of the great tribulation. In the following “great
and fear-inspiring day of Jehovah,” her political and
commercial lovers will meet their end.—Joel 2:31.

PROVE YOURSELVES READY
17

Because the judgment messages apply mainly to

false religion, some Christians might feel that they
will not be a?ected by the ful?llment of these prophecies. However, what Amos told the Israelites has
practical value to all: “Woe to those who are craving
the day of Jehovah!” Some Israelites in Amos’ day
thought that Jehovah’s day would mean only blessings for them, believing that it would be the day when
God acts for his people. They even craved that day!
To self-conceited ones, though, the day of Jehovah
would “be darkness, and no light,” Amos continued.
Yes, those Israelites were on the receiving end of Jehovah’s wrath!—Amos 5:18.
18

Amos then described what would happen to those

17, 18. (a) Why did Amos pronounce woe on those who were “craving the
day of Jehovah”? (b) What would happen to those unprepared for the day
of Jehovah?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

49

who were craving the day of Jehovah. Think of a man
who ?ees from a lion and ends up meeting a bear.
Running away from the bear, he takes refuge in a
house. Panting for breath, he closes the door behind
him and leans on the wall, only to be bitten by a
snake. In a way, that is the destiny of the ones who
are not really ready for the day of Jehovah.—Amos
5:19.
19

Do you see the practical value this account might

have for you? Recall that Amos was directing his
words to people who were in a dedicated relationship
with God. Still, there were things about their actions
and attitudes that needed adjustment. Is it not worthwhile to examine your life to see whether you are
proving yourself ready for that vital day or whether
some adjustments are in order? How can you prove
that you really are ready? Obviously, it is not by
building a shelter, storing basic food items, learning
how to purify water, or stockpiling gold coins, as
some survivalists have done. “Neither their silver nor
their gold will be able to deliver them in the day
19. In what practical ways should we prepare for the day of Jehovah?
50

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

of Jehovah’s fury,” says Zephaniah. So being ready
would not depend on the storing up of material items.
(Zephaniah 1:18; Proverbs 11:4; Ezekiel 7:19) Rather,
we have to be alert spiritually and live day by day as
ones who are ready. We need the right attitude—and
actions to match. Micah said: “As for me, it is for Jehovah that I shall keep on the lookout. I will show a
waiting attitude for the God of my salvation.”—Micah 7:7.
20

If you have this waiting attitude, you will give ev-

idence that you are ready, on the lookout for the day
of Jehovah. You will not be concerned about the date
on which that day may come or how long you have
waited for it. All the prophecies regarding that day
will be ful?lled in Jehovah’s due time and will not be
delayed. Jehovah told Habakkuk: “The vision is yet
for the appointed time, and it keeps panting on to the
end, and it will not tell a lie. Even if it should delay
[from a human standpoint], keep in expectation of it;
for it will without fail come true. It will not be late
[from Jehovah’s viewpoint].”—Habakkuk 2:3.
20. What factors do not alter our waiting attitude?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

51

21

In this book, you will learn how you can show a

waiting attitude for the God of salvation. What bene?ts can you expect? Well, the focus will be on a part
of the Bible that may be somewhat unfamiliar to you
—the 12 so-called Minor Prophets. Hence, there will
be stimulating insights. For example, in Section 2,
you will consider how to “search for Jehovah” and
keep living. (Amos 5:4, 6) Based on these 12 books,
you might discern how to get to know Jehovah better and sharpen your view of serving him, even in expanded ways. With help from these prophets, you will
doubtless deepen your understanding of his personality. In Section 3, you will see more clearly what Jehovah expects of you in your dealings with your family members and others. That can help you to be
ready for his great day. Finally, in Section 4, you will
look into the prophets’ advice on what your attitude
should be as Jehovah’s day draws nearer, learning,
too, how your Christian ministry may be impacted.
No doubt, you will be thrilled as you consider the
prophets’ message about what your future can be
like.
21. How can you bene?t from what is to come in this book?
52

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

BENEFITS FOR YOU
? How may the day of Jehovah a?ect you?
—Acts 2:19, 20; 2 Peter 3:13.
? When can you expect the day of Jehovah
to occur?—Matthew 24:21, 29.
? How can you prove yourself ready for
Jehovah’s day?—Amos 5:4, 6;
Habakkuk 2:3.
22

Do you recall the urgent words of Zephaniah

quoted at the outset of this chapter? (Zephaniah 1:
14) His message a?ected the life of young King Josiah. When he was but 16 years of age, Josiah started
to seek Jehovah. When he turned 20, he set out on a
campaign against idol worship, in line with Zephaniah’s encouragement to the people of Judah and Jerusalem. (2 Chronicles 34:1-8; Zephaniah 1:3-6) Has the
warning about the day of Jehovah touched your daily life as much as it did Josiah’s? Let us see how the
12 prophets can help each one of us.
22. How would you like to respond to the advice found in the books of the
12 prophets?
The Day of Jehovah—A Vital Theme

53

S E C T I O N

2

K NOW J EHOVAH AND
S ERVE H IM
What do the books of the 12 prophets contain that
makes us want to know Jehovah even better? Why are
Jehovah’s messages that those prophets delivered so
useful now? As you consider Chapters 4 to 7 of this
book, you will ?nd indications of how you should be
worshipping God and applying his standards. For example, how does he expect you to display justice in
your dealings? Yes, you will ?nd that these 12 prophetic
books can improve your life today.

CHAPTER FOUR

J EHOVAH—T HE G OD W HO
F ORETELLS AND F ULFILLS
MANY people feel that their life is spinning out of
control. And from news reports they have read, they
conclude that the whole human race is on a downward spiral. E?orts to remedy the world’s ills seem
merely to complicate a hopeless situation. It is noteworthy that some of the 12 prophets that we are considering faced comparable concerns, and they provided messages of hope that we ourselves can bene?t
from and that we can use in comforting others.—Micah 3:1-3; Habakkuk 1:1-4.
2

A central idea that you will ?nd in these prophet-

ic books is that Jehovah, the Sovereign of the universe, is in full control of human a?airs and is keenly interested in our welfare. In fact, each of us can
say, “He is interested in my welfare.” The 12 prophets
paint an appealing portrait of “Jehovah of armies.”
1, 2. (a) Why might some feel that no one is in control? (b) How do the
12 prophets portray Jehovah’s personality?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

55

God can ‘touch the land, so that it melts,’ yet he assures his people: “He that is touching you is touching my eyeball.” (Zechariah 2:8; Amos 4:13; 9:5) Does
it not warm your heart to read passages that illustrate
how God’s dealings are governed by love and how he
manifests mercy and forgiveness? (Hosea 6:1-3; Joel 2:
12-14) Granted, the writings of these prophets do
not explore every aspect of God’s personality; all 66
books of the Bible are needed for that. Still, these 12
provide an excellent window through which we can
see God’s appealing personality and his dealings.
3

The writings of the 12 prophets can reinforce

our con?dence in Jehovah’s trustworthiness as the
Foreteller of the future and the unfailing Ful?ller of
his purpose. They con?rm that he will ultimately
bring about an earthly paradise under divine rulership. (Micah 4:1-4) Some of those prophets describe
how Jehovah prepared the way for the coming of the
Messiah and for the ransom that would free humankind from sin and death. (Malachi 3:1; 4:5) Why is
knowing all of this vital?
3. How is it made evident by the 12 prophets that Jehovah is a God of purpose?
56

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

A LOVING S OVEREIGN IN FULL CONTROL
4

Remember the challenge hurled against God re-

garding his right to rule, as discussed in the preceding chapter. Rebellion against Jehovah’s authority
—and suspicion as to his motives—led some in heaven to disobey God and wreak havoc on earth. So it is
clear that respect for and submission to Jehovah’s
sovereignty are necessary for full order in the universe and for peace among humans. Therefore, Jehovah is rightly determined to vindicate his sovereignty. Let us review how the 12 prophetic books can help
us to see this more clearly.
5

As Jehovah’s messengers, the prophets stressed

his exalted position. For instance, in magnifying the
name and sovereignty of the Almighty, Amos uses the
designation “Sovereign Lord” 21 times. This shows
that the true God is in?nitely great and that nothing
is beyond his reach. (Amos 9:2-5; see the box “Jehovah the Almighty.”) Jehovah is the only rightful Sovereign of the universe, incomparably superior to lifeless idols. (Micah 1:7; Habakkuk 2:18-20; Zephaniah
4, 5. (a) What fundamental truth about God do the 12 prophets stress?
(b) How are you a?ected by Jehovah’s almightiness?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

57

JEHOVAH THE ALMIGHTY
A title for God in Hebrew is Shad·dai1, or “the
Almighty One.” This term is found once in the
12 prophetic books, at Joel 1:15. It has been suggested that its primary meaning is “be strong”
or “act strongly.” A similar expression, ‘Jehovah
of armies,’ is found 107 times in the 12 books.
Might implies strength or power to accomplish a
thing purposed. It also denotes overcoming obstacles or opposition. Jehovah’s almightiness involves his irresistible power to accomplish his
purpose, to ful?ll what he foretells.
2:11) Jehovah’s position as the Maker of all things
gives him the inherent right to exercise sovereign
power over all. (Amos 4:13; 5:8, 9; 9:6) Why is that
important to you?
6

If you have ever su?ered discrimination, injustice,

or prejudice, take comfort in knowing that the loving
Sovereign cares for all. Jehovah had a special relationship with one ancient nation, yet he announced
his determination to bene?t people of all nations and
6. How is every human involved in the ful?llment of God’s purpose?
58

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

languages. He is “the true Lord of the whole earth.”
(Micah 4:13) God promised that his name “will be
great among the nations.” (Malachi 1:11) As our heavenly Father impartially makes himself known, “men
out of all the languages of the nations” eagerly respond to his invitation to become his worshippers.
—Zechariah 8:23.
7

Knowledge of what God is like and what he will

do is closely linked to his name. (Psalm 9:10) When
Micah lived, Jehovah’s name was maligned because
many bearing His name were grossly disobedient. The
prophet was inspired to stress “the superiority of the
name of Jehovah” and to point out that “the person
of practical wisdom will fear [God’s] name.” (Micah
5:4; 6:9) Why? Any reliable hope that you have for an
enduring future involves the rich meaning of that
name: “He Causes to Become.” Why not read Joel 2:
26 and think about how pleased you can be to bear
that name and to tell others about the one God who
can become whatever he needs to become for the bene?t of all his creatures? God has proved to be the one
7. Why is the meaning of Jehovah’s name signi?cant?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

59

with unlimited ability to make things happen. You
can ?nd evidence of that in the ful?llment of scores
of prophecies proclaimed by the 12 prophets.
8

Millions have been a?ected positively by learning

that Jehovah can cause to be done or ful?lled whatever he chooses. Joel indicated that in the famous
words quoted by Christian writers: “Everyone who
calls on the name of Jehovah will get away safe.”
(Joel 2:32; Acts 2:21; Romans 10:13) Do we see ourselves in Micah’s a?rmation, namely, that “we, for
our part, shall walk in the name of Jehovah our God
to time inde?nite, even forever”? (Micah 4:5) Yes, during periods of persecution or in times of personal distress, we can con?dently “take refuge in the name of
Jehovah.”—Zephaniah 3:9, 12; Nahum 1:7.
9

As you read these prophetic books, you can re-

a?rm your conviction that Jehovah has control even
over human rulers and powerful decision makers. He
has the ability to move them to act in harmony with
his will. (Proverbs 21:1) Consider the case of Darius
the Great of Persia. Enemies of true worship sought
8. In what ways has Jehovah’s name motivated you?
9. How extensive is God’s control over human rulers?
60

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HOW IS YOUR FAITH STRENGTHENED
? by Jehovah’s almightiness?—Joel 1:15.
? by God’s impartiality?—Zechariah 8:23.
? by the rich meaning of God’s name?
—Micah 5:4.
his help to stop the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple
in Jerusalem. Exactly the opposite happened! About
520 B.C.E., Darius revived Cyrus’ decree and supported the Jews’ building work. When further obstacles came along, God’s message to Jewish Governor Zerubbabel was: “ ‘Not by a military force, nor by
power, but by my spirit,’ Jehovah of armies has said.
Who are you, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel
you will become a level land.” (Zechariah 4:6, 7) No
obstacle will block Jehovah’s destruction of this wicked system of things and his establishing of a paradise
for his worshippers to enjoy.—Isaiah 65:21-23.
10

Consider also that Jehovah controls the forces of

nature, which he can use to destroy his enemies if he
10. How far-reaching is God’s control, and why is that noteworthy?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

61

chooses to do so. (Nahum 1:3-6) Emphasizing how Jehovah can protect his people, Zechariah used ?gurative language: “Over them Jehovah himself will be
seen, and his arrow will certainly go forth just like
lightning. And on the horn the Sovereign Lord Jehovah himself will blow, and he will certainly go with
the windstorms of the south.” (Zechariah 9:14) Will
it, then, be di?cult for God to prove his supremacy
over ungodly nations in our time? Not at all!—Amos
1:3-5; 2:1-3.

A RELIABLE KEEPER OF PROMISES
11

Imagine that you lived during the ninth centu-

ry B.C.E. in what is now known as the Middle East.
Which great city would you probably have heard
about? Nineveh, of course. It was a prominent Assyrian city on the east bank of the Tigris River, about
550 miles northeast of Jerusalem. Reports might have
reached you about its impressive size—some 60 miles
in circumference! People who visited Nineveh said
that it rivaled Babylon for splendor, with royal pal11, 12. (a) Why was Nineveh considered invincible? (b) How did things
turn out for Nineveh, in line with God’s prophetic word?
62

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

aces, temples, broad streets, public gardens, and an
impressive library. What is more, military strategists
spoke of its massive, impenetrable outer and inner
walls.
12

“Invincible!” Many people must have said that in

describing Nineveh. But some prophets from the tiny
nation of Judah insisted that Jehovah had condemned
to destruction that “city of bloodshed.” As a result of
the people’s response to Jonah’s message, the city was
for a time spared God’s judgment. However, the Ninevites returned to their old wicked ways. Nahum foretold: “Nineveh . . . , a sword will cut you o? . . . There
is no relief for your catastrophe.” (Nahum 3:1, 7, 15,
19; Jonah 3:5-10) About that same time, God used
Zephaniah to foretell that Nineveh would become a
desolate waste. (Zephaniah 2:13) Would the invincible political reality of the day be overturned in
ful?llment of Jehovah’s word? The answer came in
about 632 B.C.E. when the Babylonians, Scythians,
and Medes besieged Nineveh. Sudden ?oods eroded
its walls, and the attackers penetrated its defenses.
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

63

(Nahum 2:6-8) The once mighty city quickly became
a mound of ruins. To this day Nineveh remains desolated.1 “The exultant city” was not able to stand in
the way of the ful?llment of God’s word!—Zephaniah 2:15.
13

What happened to Nineveh is but one example of

prophecy ful?lled. Look at a modern map of the Middle East. Can you ?nd Ammon, Assyria, Babylon,
Edom, or Moab? Hardly! Despite the fact that at one
time such nations were prominent, the 12 prophets
foretold their demise. (Amos 2:1-3; Obadiah 1, 8; Nahum 3:18; Zephaniah 2:8-11; Zechariah 2:7-9) One by
one those nations disappeared as distinct entities. Jehovah said that they would vanish, and they did! And
what these prophets foretold about a remnant of Jews
returning from captivity in Babylon was ful?lled—it
happened!
1 In November 2002, before the war in Iraq, Professor Dan Cruickshank visited the region. He reported on BBC television: “On the edge
of Mosul stands the vast ruined city of Nineveh, which—along with
Nimrud . . . was enthusiastically excavated by British archaeologists
from the 1840s onwards. . . . The exploration of these Assyrian cities
meant no less than the discovery of a long lost—almost mythical—civilisation that was known only from brief, enigmatic and far from ?attering descriptions in the Bible.”

13. What evidence of ful?lled prophecies can you ?nd in the 12 prophets?
64

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

14

How is your con?dence a?ected by such evidence

of Jehovah’s prophetic ability? You can be certain
that Jehovah will keep his promises; he is the God
“who cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2) Furthermore, through
his Word, God informs us of what we need to know.
You can build your life around the doing of Jehovah’s
will and the surety of his prophetic words. The prophecies in the 12 books are not mere examples of predictions ful?lled in the past. Many of the prophecies
are now in the course of ful?llment or are soon to be
realized. Thus, the record in these 12 books can
strengthen your con?dence that prophecies about our
time and the future will be ful?lled. Take them seriously.

A FATHER WHO CARES
15

God’s trustworthiness involves more than what

will happen to nations or on the overall world
scene. Jehovah foretells and ful?lls in ways that can
touch you personally. How so? Well, you may sometimes struggle to handle personal issues. You realize
14. Why can you con?dently build your life around Jehovah’s promises?
15. When you struggle with personal issues, how can Micah’s experiences help you?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

65

that it is not just a matter of ?nding someone who
understands—you need to ?nd someone whom you
can trust to help you. In the eighth century B.C.E.,
Micah must have felt quite lonely as he faced the
proud people of Judah. It may have seemed that
he was the last faithful person on earth, that he
could not trust even his family. Wherever he turned,
he found bloodthirsty, deceitful, and corrupt people.
Nevertheless, Micah was reassured by God’s promises to take care of His faithful ones no matter what
others might do. You too can take comfort in that, especially if as a worshipper of Jehovah, you ?nd yourself in the minority or alone, surrounded by those
who do not honor God.—Micah 7:2-9.
16

As is often the case today, the wealthy and the

powerful in Judah and Israel became greedy and unfair. Illegal slavery was the result of overtaxation and
land grabbing. The poor were treated with indi?erence, even cruelty. (Amos 2:6; 5:11, 12; Micah 2:1, 2;
3:9-12; Habakkuk 1:4) Through his messengers, God
made it clear that he does not tolerate corruption and
16. Why can you be sure that God takes note of corruption and oppression
and will deliver the righteous?
66

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

oppression and that he will punish persistent wrongdoers. (Habakkuk 2:3, 6-16) He foretells that he will
“set matters straight respecting mighty nations” and
that his approved servants “will actually sit, each one
under his vine and under his ?g tree, and there will
be no one making them tremble.” (Micah 4:3, 4)
Imagine the resulting relief! God has foretold and
then ful?lled many other things. Can you not be sure
that this promise too will be ful?lled?
17

Jehovah does not ful?ll his promises simply to

show his ability to predict, as if to impress humans.
His actions spring from principled love, for “God is
love.” (1 John 4:8) Call to mind the case of Hosea,
who lived in the eighth century B.C.E. As Hosea’s
wife, Gomer, was unfaithful to him, so the Israelites
were unfaithful to Jehovah. Their idolatry was like
adultery; they mixed Baal worship with the pure worship of Jehovah. They also ?guratively “committed
fornication” with Assyria and Egypt. How would Jehovah react? Hosea was to pursue his unfaithful wife
to bring her back. Jehovah pursued his people, out of
17, 18. (a) Why does God hold out hope for people? (b) How should we
view Jehovah’s discipline?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

67

love. “With the ropes of earthling man I kept drawing them, with the cords of love, . . . and gently I
brought food to each one.” (Hosea 2:5; 11:4) If they
would respond with sincere repentance, they could
experience God’s forgiveness, making restored relations with him possible. (Hosea 1:3, 4; 2:16, 23; 6:1-3;
14:4) Are you not moved when you note Jehovah’s affection? Ask yourself, ‘If Jehovah showed such affection in the past, can I not be sure of his love,
his tender, loyal, unchanging, and undying a?ection?’
—Hosea 11:8.
18

The 12 prophetic books can also help you to see

that God’s love may include correction. Jehovah assured his errant people that he would “not completely annihilate” them. (Amos 9:8) When punishment
was necessary, God did not withhold such, but what
a relief it should have been to know that his punishment would be temporary! Malachi 1:6 likens Jehovah to a loving father. You know that a father may
discipline his beloved children in order to correct
them. (Nahum 1:3; Hebrews 12:6) Yet, our heavenly
Father’s love makes him slow to anger, and Malachi
68

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

3:10, 16 con?rms that he will generously reward his
servants.
19

Malachi begins his book with the assurance: “ ‘I

have loved you people,’ Jehovah has said.” (Malachi
1:2) As you re?ect on that divine assurance to Israel,
ask yourself: ‘Am I doing anything that may hinder
me from enjoying God’s love? What is there about
God’s love that I want to know and experience more
fully?’ By deeply sensing God’s love, you can be increasingly assured of his eternal a?ection.

FORGIVENES S OPENS THE WAY
TO SALVATION
20

In reading these prophetic books, you will note

that sometimes Jehovah foretold calamities. Why? Often, it was to move his people to repent. To that
end, he allowed foreigners to destroy Samaria in
740 B.C.E. and Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E. What God
foretold was ful?lled, but later he allowed repentant
ones to be restored to their land. Yes, these books
stress that God graciously forgives and restores those
who turn from sin and come to him. (Habakkuk 3:13;
19. What self-examination is appropriate?
20. How does divine forgiveness open the way to salvation?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

69

Zephaniah 2:2, 3) Micah was moved to proclaim:
“Who is a God like you, one pardoning error and
passing over transgression of the remnant of his inheritance? He will certainly not hold onto his anger
forever, for he is delighting in loving-kindness.” (Micah 7:18; Joel 2:13; Zechariah 1:4) The ful?llment of
prophecy con?rms that.
21

As to a permanent legal basis for lasting for-

giveness, Jehovah foretold the coming of the Messiah, who would sacri?ce his human life as “a corresponding ransom” for sinful mankind. (1 Timothy
2:6) Amos pointed to a restoration that the Messiah,
the son of David, would bring about. (Amos 9:11, 12;
Acts 15:15-19) Micah even pointed out the very birthplace of Jesus, the one to appear with life-giving bene?ts for all who would exercise faith in His sacri?ce.
(Micah 5:2) And Zechariah spoke about the “Sprout,”
Jesus, who would “sit down and rule on his throne.”
(Zechariah 3:8; 6:12, 13; Luke 1:32, 33) Your faith
will undoubtedly be strengthened by examining more
21. (a) What did the 12 prophets indicate about the Messiah? (b) What
Messianic prophecies do you ?nd interesting?
70

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

MAJOR PROPHECIES
AB OUT THE MES SIAH
Prophecy

Found at

Ful?llment

Born in Bethlehem

Micah 5:2

Luke 2:4-11;
John 7:42

Called out of
refuge in Egypt

Hosea 11:1

Matthew 2:14, 15

Entered Jerusalem
on an ass

Zechariah 9:9

Matthew 21:1-9;
John 12:12-15

Betrayed for
30 pieces of silver

Zechariah
11:12

Matthew 26:15;
27:3-10

Shepherd struck,
?ock scattered

Zechariah 13:7

Matthew 26:31, 56

Pierced while
on the stake

Zechariah
12:10

Matthew 27:49;
John 19:34, 37

In grave parts
of three days,
then resurrected

Jonah 1:17; 2: Matthew 12:39, 40; 16:21;
10
1 Corinthians 15:3-8

of such prophecies.—See the box “Major Prophecies
About the Messiah.”
22

As you read the messages of the 12 prophets,

your con?dence in God’s ?nal victory will grow.
22. How is your con?dence in Jehovah enhanced by what the 12 prophets
reveal about him?
Jehovah—The God Who Foretells and Fulfills

71

HOW CAN YOU FORTIFY YOUR
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD
? by meditating on his ability to ful?ll his
promises?—Joel 2:11.
? by contemplating his tender love?—Hosea
11:4; 14:4; Zephaniah 3:17.
? by pondering on his mercy and forgiveness?
—Hosea 2:23; Micah 7:18.
Jehovah is our Champion, and he will bring about
true justice. God’s word endures. He remembers his
agreements with his people, cares for his servants,
and delivers them from all oppressors. (Micah 7:
8-10; Zephaniah 2:6, 7) Jehovah has not changed.
(Malachi 3:6) How reassuring it is to know that God
faces no dilemmas or barriers as to ful?lling his purpose! When he says that his day of judgment will
come, it will come. Therefore, keep on the watch for
Jehovah’s day! “Jehovah must become king over all
the earth. In that day Jehovah will prove to be one,
and his name one.” (Zechariah 14:9) He foretells
that; he will ful?ll it.
72

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER FIVE

“S EEK J EHOVAH ” T HROUGH
W ORSHIP H E A PPROVES
HOW privileged you are to know the God who ful?lls prophecies! You are in a position to enjoy the
condition about which the prophet Hosea wrote: “I
will engage you to me in faithfulness; and you will
certainly know Jehovah.” Hosea was depicting a secure, paradiselike condition that God’s people would
enjoy on returning from exile in Babylon. Similarly,
God’s people in modern times enjoy spiritual prosperity and security; their situation is like a paradise.
(Hosea 2:18-20) Now, you have come to bear God’s
name as one of his dedicated servants—one of Jehovah’s Witnesses—and want to continue doing so.
—Isaiah 43:10, 12; Acts 15:14.
2

Ancient Israel was a nation dedicated to Jehovah,

who gave them a set of precepts that no other nation
had received. (Deuteronomy 4:33-35) Yet, by the end
1. What blessings are you enjoying among God’s people?
2, 3. (a) Why did Jehovah come to hate his ancient people’s way of worship? (b) Why should we consider the messages that the prophets delivered?
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

73

of the ninth century B.C.E., the Israelites’ situation
had changed so much that God had the prophet Amos
tell them: “I have hated, I have rejected your festivals . . . If you people o?er up to me whole burnt
o?erings, even in your gift o?erings I shall ?nd no
pleasure.” (Amos 5:21, 22) Whereas God is not saying such a thing to his worldwide congregation today, can you imagine how you would have felt upon
hearing such an evaluation of your worship? Is there
a lesson here for each one of us?
3

Back in those days, God’s people claimed to be

worshipping Jehovah in the way that he approved.
However, many of them were serving pagan gods,
such as the Canaanite Baal and the calf images, or
were o?ering sacri?ces on the high places. They were
bowing down to the army of the heavens while still
making oaths to Jehovah. Hence, the true God sent
prophets to urge the people to return to him in pure
worship. (2 Kings 17:7-17; 21:3; Amos 5:26) It is clear,
then, that even for dedicated servants of God, there
might be areas needing attention—actions or atti74

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

tudes that should be examined to be sure that these
re?ect worship that Jehovah approves.

“KNOWLED GE OF G OD”
4

Think of the period when the earliest of the

12 prophets spoke for God. The day of Jehovah was
being foretold to strike the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel. On the surface, however, an air of prosperity
existed. Just as Jonah had prophesied, King Jeroboam II restored the boundary of Israel from the north
toward Damascus to the Dead Sea. (2 Kings 14:2427) Though Jeroboam did what was bad, Jehovah was
long-su?ering, not wanting to wipe out Israel from
under the heavens. God allowed time for the Israelites to repent, to “search for Jehovah, and keep living.”—Amos 5:6.
5

The prosperous Israelites could have used the

time to return to Jehovah by getting to know him
better and pursuing what he approved. Instead, they
were self-assured, feeling that ‘the calamity would not
come near or reach as far as them.’ (Amos 9:10) You
4. What conditions prevailed during the reign of King Jeroboam II?
5. The Israelites’ lack of what led to rejection by Jehovah?
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

75

might say they forgot Jehovah in that “they became
satis?ed and their heart began to be exalted.” (Hosea 13:6) We should not feel that this is just ancient
history that does not touch us. Note the reason why
Jehovah had a legal case against the Israelites: “Because the knowledge is what you yourself have rejected, I shall also reject you from serving as a priest
to me.” They were dedicated to Jehovah and surrounded by dedicated family members. Yet, individually they lacked true “knowledge of God.”—Hosea
4:1, 6.
6

It was not as if they had never heard the words

of God, which Israelite parents were to consider with
their children. Most had likely heard some Bible accounts from their parents, in conversation around
them, or at public assemblies. (Exodus 20:4, 5; Deuteronomy 6:6-9; 31:11-13) For instance, they had heard
what happened when Aaron made a golden calf while
Moses was on Mount Sinai to receive the Ten Commandments. (Exodus 31:18–32:9) Hence, the Israelites
in the prophets’ day had some knowledge of the Law
6. In what sense were the Israelites de?cient in the knowledge of God?
76

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

and had heard historical accounts. Nevertheless, their
knowledge was dead in that they did not let it move
them to worship God in the way that he wanted.
7

You might wonder, ‘How could the Israelites be

so easily lured into disobedience?’ Hosea described
the process: “Israel began forgetting his Maker.” (Hosea 8:14) The form of the original Hebrew verb is
well-rendered “began forgetting.” The Israelites were
not suddenly su?ering from amnesia about Jehovah.
Rather, over time they lost sight of the importance
of worshipping him in the way that he approved. Do
you think that a Christian could fall into such a trap?
Take, for example, a man who is serious about providing for his family. (1 Timothy 5:8) To do so, he
would appropriately view his secular work as important. Perhaps something develops, and he feels that
he must miss some Christian meetings in order to
work. In time, missing meetings becomes easier, and
he misses more frequently. Little by little, his bond
with God weakens—he has ‘begun to forget his Maker.’ A similar thing may happen to a Christian whose
7. (a) How did the Israelites become disobedient so easily? (b) How can
a Christian ‘begin to forget his Maker’?
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

77

parents or other relatives are unbelievers. He faces
issues: How much time will he reserve for them, and
when? (Exodus 20:12; Matthew 10:37) What about deciding how much time and attention to use for trips,
hobbies, or entertainment?
8

We have studied God’s Word and put our knowl-

edge to work. Still, each of us might consider a phrase
used in the book of Amos: “cleanness of teeth.”
Through Amos, God warned His people: “I also, for
my part, gave you people cleanness of teeth in all
your cities and want of bread in all your places.”
(Amos 4:6) That cleanness was not from brushing. It
was from having nothing to eat, su?ering famine.
Moreover, it was a warning of “a famine, not for
bread, and a thirst, not for water, but for hearing the
words of Jehovah.”—Amos 8:11.
9

Spiritually, what Amos described ?nds a ful?ll-

ment in the sad condition of Christendom. In contrast, “the ?oodgates of the heavens” are open for
God’s people worldwide. They are blessed with spir8. In Amos’ day, what did it mean to have “cleanness of teeth”?
9, 10. (a) How might a Christian end up being spiritually famished?
(b) Why do we need to be alert to the dangers of spiritual starvation?
78

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

BY WAY OF REVIEW
? In line with the 12 prophets’ message,
what did God’s people need to do?
—Zephaniah 2:3.
? How did God’s ancient people forget
him?—Hosea 8:14.
? Why do Christians need to be alert even
while living amid spiritual plenty?
—Amos 4:6; 8:11.
itual provisions aplenty. (Malachi 3:10; Isaiah 65:13,
14) A Christian can ask, though, ‘To what extent do
I personally enjoy that spiritual food?’ Interestingly,
some researchers have found that laboratory animals
that had a damaged hunger center of the brain lost
their appetite to the point that they might starve to
death amid ample food! Could an individual Christian’s spiritual hunger center be a?ected to the point
that he begins to starve even though he is surrounded by ample spiritual food?
10

With your own situation in mind, consider this:

Jehovah provided abundant spiritual food for the
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

79

Israelites. They had the Law, which could strengthen their relationship with him; they had a program
of education to inculcate godly knowledge in their
o?spring; and they had prophets to help them understand God’s will. Nevertheless, they began forgetting
Jehovah. The Bible says that in the days of Hosea,
“they became satis?ed [materially] and their heart began to be exalted.” (Hosea 13:6; Deuteronomy 8:11;
31:20) If we do not want our material situation to
overshadow our bond with God, we need to be conscious of that danger daily.—Zephaniah 2:3.

TAKE NOTE OF THE WEIGHTIER MATTERS
11

While Jeroboam II reigned in Israel, Uzziah (also

called Azariah) ruled in Judah. He extended his territory and expanded Jerusalem. Uzziah “displayed
strength to an extraordinary degree” because “the
true God continued to help him.” He “kept doing
what was right in Jehovah’s eyes” and “tended to
search for God.” Many people in Judah, however,
11, 12. (a) During the rule of King Uzziah, why did the prophets have to
encourage the people to come back to Jehovah? (b) What need did Joel
highlight?
80

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

continued to make sacri?cial smoke on the high
places.—2 Chronicles 26:4-9.
12

You can discern from this that although people

in Judah and Israel bore God’s name, often their worship included things that he did not approve. The
prophets tried to help them distinguish true worship
from false. “Come back to me with all your hearts,
and with fasting and with weeping and with wailing,”
God pleaded through Joel. (Joel 2:12) Note: God
wanted his people to come to him ‘with all their
hearts.’ Yes, the problem involved their heart. (Deuteronomy 6:5) In a sense, they were going through
the motions of worshipping Jehovah, yet their hearts
were not fully with him. Time and again, he emphasized through the prophets the importance of lovingkindness, justice, and meekness—all of which are
qualities of the heart.—Matthew 23:23.
13

Next, consider what took place after the Jews re-

turned to their homeland. Though true worship in
harmony with the Law was restored, all was not right.
13. What did the Jews who returned from exile in Babylon need to consider?
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

81

The Jews fasted on days that were anniversaries
of events linked to Jerusalem’s destruction. “Did you
really fast to me, even me?” Jehovah asked. The desolation of that city had occurred because of divine
justice, which was not something to bemoan. Instead
of looking back at the past and fasting mournfully,
those Jews should have been exulting, rejoicing in festal seasons because of the blessings of true worship.
(Zechariah 7:3-7; 8:16, 19) And they needed to give
attention to other matters. What, for example? “With
true justice do your judging; and carry on with one
another loving-kindness and mercies . . . and scheme
out nothing bad against one another in your hearts.”
(Zechariah 7:9, 10) We can all bene?t from what
those prophets taught God’s people about wholehearted worship of God.
14

What does wholehearted worship encompass?

Well, what was required of God’s people both before
and after the exile? You know that God’s standards
on moral issues had to be upheld. There were also
14. (a) The returned exiles needed to include what in their worship?
(b) How did the prophets emphasize the weightier aspects of worship?
82

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

speci?c actions or activities called for in the Law, including gathering to hear and learn God’s will. In addition, though, God had his prophets stress the cultivating and displaying of loving-kindness, justice,
meekness, mercy, and modesty. Notice how Jehovah
emphasized these: “In loving-kindness I have taken
delight, and not in sacri?ce; and in the knowledge of
God rather than in whole burnt o?erings.” “Sow seed
for yourselves in righteousness; reap in accord with
loving-kindness.” (Hosea 6:6; 10:12; 12:6) Micah declared: “What is Jehovah asking back from you but
to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be
modest in walking with your God?” (Micah 6:6-8)
And the prophet Zephaniah urged God’s people:
“Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth . . .
Seek righteousness, seek meekness.” (Zephaniah 2:3)
Those attitudes are essential to worship that God approves.
15

What part do those attitudes play in our wor-

ship? You know that preaching the good news of the
15. In line with what the prophets admonished, what do Christians need to
do in their worship?
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

83

Kingdom is vital. (Matthew 24:14; Acts 1:8) But you
might ask yourself: ‘Am I inclined to view preaching
in my area as a task, a burden? Or do I view it as an
opportunity to help individuals who need to hear the
Bible’s lifesaving message? Do I show them mercy?’
Yes, mercy and loving-kindness should motivate us to
warn others of the day of Jehovah. Justice and righteousness also come into play as we try to reach all
sorts of people with that message.—1 Timothy 2:4.
16

As another example, consider our obligation to

attend Christian meetings, which you know are important. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) Have you thought of
how that involves meekness and modesty? Meek ones
are humble enough to accept instruction and then to
apply what they learn, thus practicing Jehovah’s judicial decision. One who is modest, recognizing his limitations, will appreciate his need for the encouragement and the knowledge that are available through
the meetings.
17

You can see from these examples how we can

bene?t from what the prophets taught. Yet, what if
16, 17. Why are meekness and modesty vital in your worship?
84

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

you sense the need to make adjustments in one or
more of the areas mentioned above? Or what if you
have made serious mistakes, memories of which bother you at times? The 12 prophets o?er you comfort
and help.

RETURN TO JEHOVAH
18

As we have seen, the prophets we are consider-

ing did much more than denounce and condemn.
They depicted Jehovah as urging the people to come
back to him. Re?ect on the feeling behind Hosea’s
urgings: “Come, you people, and do let us return to
Jehovah, for he himself has torn in pieces but he will
heal us. He kept striking, but he will bind us up. . . .
And we will know, we will pursue to know Jehovah.”
(Hosea 6:1-3) Granted, in his justice, Jehovah God
executed judgment against Israel and then Judah.
Still, his people should have viewed those blows as
steps to restore them to spiritual health. (Hebrews
12:7-13) If Jehovah’s wayward people would return,
he would ‘heal them’ and ‘bind them up.’ Picture in
18. (a) For whom do the 12 prophets have an especially comforting message? (b) How do you feel about Jehovah, who pleads with people to return
to him?
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

85

your mind a man kneeling to bind up the injury of
his fellow. Now shift that image to Jehovah. What a
merciful God Jehovah is, one who binds up those
willing to return to him! Does that not move us
to want to return to him if we sin against him?
—Joel 2:13.
19

What does returning to God involve? Hosea re-

minds us of the need not just to “know” God but to
“pursue to know Jehovah.” A modern reference work
says concerning Hosea 6:3: “There is a marked di?erence between knowing about God and knowing God.
It is comparable to the di?erence between reading
about love and falling in love.” We need more than
super?cial knowledge about Jehovah. He must become real to us, our trusted Friend whom we can approach freely. (Jeremiah 3:4) Having such a relationship, you can sense how he feels when you act in a
certain way, and that is a great help in pursuing worship that he approves.
20

King Josiah was a ?ne example in pursuing true

19. What is involved in knowing Jehovah?
20, 21. How did King Josiah make the knowledge of God his own?
86

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

worship. Consider further his experience. By the time
that Josiah became king, the nation had been ruined
by the idolatry, violence, and deception that had
abounded during the reigns of Manasseh and Amon.
(2 Kings 21:1-6, 19-21) Zephaniah’s admonition to
“seek Jehovah” must have had a positive e?ect on
Josiah, for “he started to search for the God of David.” Josiah embarked on a campaign to rid Judah of
idolatry, extending that e?ort even to what had once
been territory of the northern kingdom.—Zephaniah
1:1, 14-18; 2:1-3; 3:1-4; 2 Chronicles 34:3-7.
21

After this cleansing, Josiah continued to seek Je-

hovah. He ordered temple repairs. During that work,
“the book of Jehovah’s law by the hand of Moses”
was found, evidently the original manuscript of the
Law. How did Josiah react when that book was read?
“As soon as the king heard the words of the law,
he immediately ripped his garments apart.” He also
‘ripped apart his heart’ and promptly applied what
was read. He did not try to justify himself, saying
that he had already done so much. Do you recall the
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

87

result of his reform? “All his days [the sons of Israel] did not turn aside from following Jehovah the God
of their forefathers.”—2 Chronicles 34:8, 14, 19, 21,
30-33; Joel 2:13.
22

‘How would I have reacted?’ you might ask.

Would you, like Josiah, have listened to the words of
the prophets and made the needed changes in your
actions or thinking? Although we do not live in the
days of Zephaniah and Josiah, we can see the need
to respond to God’s messages and counsel today. So
if a Christian feels in his heart the need to adjust
his way of life or worship, a consideration of the
12 prophets can serve as a personal wake-up call.
—Hebrews 2:1.
23

At times, you may feel as Jonah did when he was

in the belly of the big ?sh: “I have been driven away
from in front of your eyes! How shall I gaze again
upon your holy temple?” (Jonah 2:4) Yet, how reassuring the words of Jehovah can be to us, imperfect humans prone to make mistakes! “Return to me,
22. How can we bene?t from Josiah’s example?
23. If you feel that you need to improve in some area, what can you do?
88

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HOW DO YOU FEEL?
? What is involved in wholehearted worship
that Jehovah approves?—Hosea 6:6;
Micah 6:8.
? If you ever feel somewhat alienated from
Jehovah, how can you return to him?
—Hosea 6:1-3.
? How can you imitate King Josiah in
seeking Jehovah?—2 Chronicles 34:19-21;
Joel 2:13.
and I will return to you.” (Malachi 3:7) If you see
the need to strengthen your relationship with Jehovah, the elders in your congregation will be pleased
to help you. As with driving a car, you ?rst have to
begin in low gear, so to speak. Once you are moving,
progress will become easier. You can be sure that Jehovah will welcome and assist you, for he is “gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in
loving-kindness.” (Joel 2:12-14) Certainly, the messages from the prophets are encouraging to all who
are pursuing worship that God approves.
“Seek Jehovah” Through Worship He Approves

89

CHAPTER SIX

“L ET J USTICE R OLL F ORTH ”
—A K EY TO K NOWING G OD
DOWN through history, there have been people who
became famous for promoting justice. But consider
this fact: Justice has an appeal because humans were
made in God’s image. You have a personal sense of
justice and want others to treat you justly because
you are made in the image of Jehovah, who ‘takes
delight’ in justice.—Jeremiah 9:24; Genesis 1:27; Isaiah 40:14.
2

As you read various books of the Bible, you can

gain insight into God’s justice. But you will be especially rewarded by examining the books of the
12 prophets. Justice is so prominent in them that an
edition of Hosea, Amos, and Micah published by a
Bible society is entitled Justice Now! Consider, for example, Amos’ urgings: “Let justice roll forth just like
waters, and righteousness like a constantly ?owing
1. What is behind your having a sense of justice?
2, 3. Why consider the books of the 12 prophets to learn about Jehovah’s
justice?
90

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

torrent.” And note what Micah put ?rst among your
obligations: “What is Jehovah asking back from you
but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be
modest in walking with your God?”—Amos 5:24; Micah 6:8.
3

Therefore, to know Jehovah better and thus to be

in a position to imitate him, we certainly need to
recognize his justice. Jehovah’s justice is an aspect
of his very being, so we cannot say that we know
him unless we appreciate his justice. Even his ancient servants knew that “Jehovah is a lover of justice.”—Psalm 33:5; 37:28.
4

Sometime before Jehovah executed judgment on

Jerusalem, the prophet Habakkuk asked: “How long,
O Jehovah, must I cry for help? . . . Law grows
numb, and justice never goes forth. Because the
wicked one is surrounding the righteous one, for that
reason justice goes forth crooked.” (Habakkuk 1:
2, 4) Faithful Habakkuk had come to know Jehovah
through the Scriptures available to him and through
4. Illustrate why the writings of the 12 prophets can strengthen your con?dence in God’s justice.
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

91

his own experience. Thus, he was con?dent that God
both upholds and encourages justice. However, the
prophet was concerned about why Jehovah permits
wickedness. God con?rmed to Habakkuk that He
would deal justly with the faithful. (Habakkuk 2:4)
If Habakkuk and others could have such con?dence,
you have much stronger reason for having it. Why?
Well, the Bible is now complete, so you can consider a more extensive record of Jehovah’s dealings and
expressions of his personality, including his justice.
Hence, you are in a better position to know Jehovah
and to be convinced of his perfect justice.
5

When sending messengers to Israel, Jehovah

stressed being just. (Isaiah 1:17; 10:1, 2; Jeremiah 7:
5-7; Ezekiel 45:9) He de?nitely kept that to the fore
through the 12 prophets. (Amos 5:7, 12; Micah 3:9;
Zechariah 8:16, 17) Anyone reading their writings
can see that they call for exercising justice in one’s
daily a?airs. There are many ways that we can apply
the lessons from these 12 books, but let us examine
two areas in which those prophets emphasized jus5. What aspect of justice is of particular interest now?
92

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

tice and then see how we can put what we learn into
practice.

JUSTICE IN BUSINES S AND
IN MONEY MATTERS
6

Jesus said: “Man must not live by bread alone.”

(Luke 4:4; Deuteronomy 8:3) He did not deny that
we need bread—we need to eat. For most, that
means working or having someone in the family
work to put food on the table. That was also true
of God’s ancient servants. Some were self-employed
—raising crops or making such products as clothing,
furniture, or cooking utensils. Others were employers—hiring men to harvest crops or to make ?our,
olive oil, or wine. Still others were merchants—buying and selling goods. Or some might have provided
a service—perhaps repairing roofs or playing musical instruments.—Exodus 35:35; Deuteronomy 24:14,
15; 2 Kings 3:15; 22:6; Matthew 20:1-8; Luke 15:25.
7

Can you see parallels to your own life or to that

of friends and relatives? Granted, the technicalities
6, 7. Why should justice in business and in money matters concern all
of us?
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

93

of work today may be di?erent, but do you not agree
that God’s view of justice in such matters would
be the same as it was back then? In his messages
through the 12 prophets, Jehovah showed that he expects his people to practice justice in such areas of
life. As we consider some indications of that, think
of how you are called on to display godly justice.
—Psalm 25:4, 5.
8

God declared through Malachi: “I will come near

to you people for the judgment, and I will become a
speedy witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against those swearing falsely, and
against those acting fraudulently with the wages of
a wage worker, . . . while they have not feared me.”
(Malachi 3:5) Yes, Jehovah condemned those who
dealt unjustly with employees, or hired workers. How
serious was that? Well, he listed abusing workers
along with spiritism, adultery, and lying. Christians
know how God will judge ‘fornicators, those practicing spiritism, and all the liars.’—Revelation 21:8.
8, 9. (a) Why was the condemnation stated at Malachi 3:5 especially serious? (b) The Scriptures promote what balanced view of employment and
work?
94

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

9

What was happening in the workplace was not

merely a matter of human morality; Jehovah’s justice
was involved. He said that because of the treachery
of those “acting fraudulently with the wages of a
wage worker,” he would ‘come near to those people
for executing judgment.’ Admittedly, God did not say
that an employer had to acquiesce to every whim of
an employee or a group of workers. You can see
from Jesus’ illustration of men hired to work in a
vineyard that an employer’s position entitled him to
set wages and work conditions. (Matthew 20:1-7, 1315) Signi?cantly, in Jesus’ illustration all workmen
were paid a denarius, the contracted ‘day’s wage,’
whether they worked the full day or not. We can also
note that the employer did not use dishonesty to
make more pro?t at the expense of those hired.—Jeremiah 22:13.
10

If you own a business with employees—or even

if you just hire someone to do a job—how do your
wages, requests, and monetary dealings measure up
in the light of Malachi 3:5? It is good to think about
10. Why should we be interested in how our employees are treated?
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

95

this because the issue of not treating hired workers
justly is considered in the Christian Greek Scriptures too. Concerning those dealing unjustly in such
matters, the disciple James asked: “Is he [Jehovah]
not opposing you?” (James 5:1, 4, 6) We are correct
to conclude: Those who are unjust as to “the wages
of a wage worker” have not really come to know Jehovah, for they are not imitating his justice.
11

Now read why Jehovah opposed some prominent

men in Hosea’s day: “The princes of Judah have become just like those moving back a boundary. Upon
them I shall pour out my fury just like water.” (Hosea 5:10) What wrong did Hosea denounce? A Judaean farmer lived o? his land, its boundaries being
marked with stones or posts. To ‘move back a boundary’ was to shrink a farmer’s plot and deprive him of
some of his living, robbing him. Hosea likened Judaean princes, who should have been advocating justice, to those moving back boundary markers.—Deuteronomy 19:14; 27:17; Job 24:2; Proverbs 22:28.
11, 12. (a) What unjust course does Hosea 5:10 highlight? (b) How can
you apply the principle found at Hosea 5:10?
96

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

12

Some today who deal in real estate might be

tempted ‘to move back boundaries’ in order to deceive buyers. Yet, the principle applies to merchants,
employers, employees, or clients—anyone involved
with contracts or agreements. As you know, some in
the business world hesitate to put things in writing,
thinking that later it will be easier to do less than
was agreed upon or to make new demands. Others
do o?er a written contract but include details in ?ne
print in order to distort its meaning to their advantage, even if this unjustly hurts the other party. Do
you think that someone acting similarly—whether a
merchant or a customer, an employer or an employee—really knows the God of justice? Jehovah
said in his Word: “Do not move back the boundary
[of fatherless boys]. For their Redeemer is strong; he
himself will plead their cause with you.”—Proverbs 23:
10, 11; Habakkuk 2:9.
13

Micah 6:10-12 sheds still more light on justice:

“Do there yet exist in the house of a wicked one the
13. According to Micah 6:10-12, what injustices existed among God’s ancient people?
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

97

treasures of wickedness, and the scrimped ephah
measure that is denounced? Can I be morally clean
with wicked scales and with a bag of deceptive stone
weights? For her own . . . inhabitants have spoken
falsehood, and their tongue is tricky.” Today we may
measure foods in liters or quarts, not ephahs. Or we
weigh things in kilos or pounds rather than in stone
weights on a balance. Still, Micah’s point is clear.
Merchants or businessmen in his day were cheats; by
not using standardized weights and measures, they
treated people unjustly. ‘Wicked ones’ is what God
called those ‘tricky with their mouth’ and in their
business dealings.—Deuteronomy 25:13-16; Proverbs
20:10; Amos 8:5.
14

Do Micah’s words on deceptive weights and mea-

sures have a bearing on how you run your business
or what you do as an employee? It is something to
think about, since there are countless ways customers and clients get defrauded. For example, some unscrupulous contractors put less than the normal or
legal amount of cement in a mix. Or, in areas that
14. Micah’s warning can help us avoid what sort of modern injustice?
98

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

WHAT DID YOU LEARN?
? Regarding justice, what pattern do you have?
—Psalm 37:28; Hosea 2:19, 20.
? Why should you cultivate and pursue
justice?—Amos 5:6, 7; Zephaniah 2:3.
? How can you exercise justice in your business or ?nancial dealings?—Hosea 5:10; 12:
6, 7; Amos 8:5; Micah 2:1, 2; Malachi 3:5.
he knows will be hidden, a craftsman may use cheaper materials than what is paid for. Some merchants
pass o? as brand-new items that are actually used.
And you may have heard of other so-called tricks of
the trade employed to increase pro?ts. Would you be
tempted to try them? A recent book on protecting
one’s privacy noted that Jehovah’s Witnesses “believe
their Creator is watching them, and most would rather die than steal.” It added: “They are in demand in
businesses where large sums of money are being handled.” Why? Because true Christians know that Jehovah is ‘asking them to exercise justice,’ including in
their business and ?nancial a?airs.—Micah 6:8.
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

99

“PRINCES FOR JUSTICE ITSELF”
15

You can see from the books of the 12 prophets

that in some periods, justice su?ered badly. Those in
authority, who should have been exemplary as to justice, were not. (Exodus 18:21; 23:6-8; Deuteronomy 1:
17; 16:18) Micah pleaded: “Hear, please, you heads
of Jacob and you commanders of the house of Israel. Is it not your business to know justice? You haters of what is good and lovers of badness, tearing o?
their skin from people and their organism from o?
their bones.”—Micah 3:1-3; Isaiah 1:17.
16

Those words should have shocked people famil-

iar with rural life. A shepherd would at times shear
the sheep he cared for and protected. (Genesis 38:
12, 13; 1 Samuel 25:4) But the “commanders of
the house of Israel,” who should have ‘known justice,’ exploited the people of God’s pasturage, as
if tearing the skin and ?esh o? sheep and breaking their bones. (Psalm 95:7) Switching to another illustration from rural life, Micah said that princes
‘who were judging for a reward’ were like a brier
15, 16. How were the leaders in Micah’s day dealing with the people?
100

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

or a thorn hedge. (Micah 7:3, 4) Imagine passing
through an area full of briers and thorn hedges.
Likely, you would get scratched, and your clothes
would be ripped. That illustrates the e?ect of the
leaders on God’s people. Rather than dealing with
their brothers justly, they were treacherous and corrupt.—Micah 3:9, 11.
17

Zephaniah made a similar point: “Her princes in

the midst of her were roaring lions. Her judges were
evening wolves that did not gnaw bones till the
morning.” (Zephaniah 3:3) Can you picture leaders
of God’s people who, like rapacious, wild lions, disregarded righteousness? Or judges who, like ravenous, insatiable wolves, devoured everything, so that
only bones could be found when morning came?
How could justice stand up under that? Justice was
ripped to shreds by leaders who preyed on the people rather than caring for them.
18

Clearly, those leaders in a nation dedicated to

God did not know him. If they had, they would have
17. According to Zephaniah 3:3, what attitude did the leaders have?
18. How should the judges in Israel have treated God’s people?
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

101

obeyed Zechariah 8:16: “These are the things that
you people should do: Speak truthfully with one another. With truth and the judgment of peace do your
judging in your gates.” Older men in Israel met at
the city gate and were to handle judicial cases, not
in accord with ?rst impressions or personal inclination, but in accord with God’s thinking. (Deuteronomy 22:15) And Jehovah had warned against showing
partiality, such as toward the wealthy or prominent.
(Leviticus 19:15; Deuteronomy 1:16, 17) The judges
were to try to restore peace between contending parties, rendering “the judgment of peace.”
19

The apostle Paul quoted part of Zechariah 8:16

when writing to Christians. (Ephesians 4:15, 25) So
we can be sure that the 12 prophets’ warnings and
counsel about justice have a valid application in the
congregation today. Older men, or overseers, ought
to be exemplary in knowing Jehovah and in re?ecting his justice. Isaiah 32:1 describes them refreshingly as “princes for justice itself.” What practical
19, 20. (a) Why can Christian elders learn much from the 12 prophets?
(b) How can elders show that they know Jehovah and his justice?
102

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

points about such elders can we discern from the
warnings and counsel found in the 12 prophets?
20

Christian elders ought to bear in mind Scriptur-

al truth and indications of Jehovah’s thinking. They
need to base their decisions on such rather than on
mere personal opinion or on what might be called a
gut feeling. The Bible shows that there may be dif?cult cases, those that require extra time to prepare
for, doing private research in the Bible and the publications containing wise counsel from the faithful
and discreet slave class. (Exodus 18:26; Matthew 24:
45) When elders put forth such e?ort, it is more likely that they will hate what is bad and love what is
good from God’s standpoint. This will help them to
“give justice a place in the gate” so that ‘with true
justice they will do their judging.’—Amos 5:15; Zechariah 7:9.
21

Even if one with the responsibility to do judg-

ing has Bible knowledge, he might show some partiality. Malachi deplored the fact that the priests,
21. Why should elders avoid showing partiality, but what might tempt them
to do otherwise?
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

103

who should have been a source of knowledge, “were
showing partiality in the law.” (Malachi 2:7-9) How
could that happen? Well, Micah said that some head
ones were ‘judging merely for a bribe, and priests
were instructing just for a price.’ (Micah 3:11) How
might an elder’s thinking be similarly a?ected? What
if the person he is dealing with has been generous to
him in the past, or what if the elder foresees some
possible bene?t in the future? Or suppose the case
he is handling involves someone related to him by
blood or by marriage. Will family ties or spiritual
principles win out? An elder’s impartiality could be
a?ected when he is handling a case of wrongdoing or
weighing whether another is Scripturally quali?ed
for additional privileges of service in the congregation.—1 Samuel 2:22-25, 33; Acts 8:18-20; 1 Peter 5:2.
22

When someone sins seriously, the spiritual shep-

herds in the congregation act to protect it from any
dangerous, corrupting in?uence. (Acts 20:28-30; Titus 3:10, 11) If, though, the erring one is genuine22. (a) Elders have what responsibility as to justice? (b) What other godly qualities should elders re?ect when dealing with erring ones?
104

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ly repentant, the elders want to “readjust such a
man in a spirit of mildness.” (Galatians 6:1) Rather
than show harsh coldness, they apply the direction:
“With true justice do your judging; and carry on with
one another loving-kindness and mercies.” (Zechariah 7:9) Jehovah’s regulations about handling legal
cases in ancient Israel highlight his justice and mercy. Appointed judges had some latitude in many of
their decisions; they could show mercy, depending on
the circumstances and the wrongdoer’s attitude. Accordingly, Christian overseers must strive to judge
“with true justice” and to display “loving-kindness
and mercies,” thus manifesting that they have come
to know Jehovah.
23

Recall Zechariah 8:16: “With truth and the judg-

ment of peace do your judging in your gates.” What
is the objective? “The judgment of peace.” Even
when the apostles were alive, there were personal
di?erences or disputes between some Christians. As
Paul did with Euodia and Syntyche, elders today
23, 24. (a) How can elders promote “the judgment of peace”? (b) The
12 prophets have helped you to appreciate what with respect to justice?
“Let Justice Roll Forth”—A Key to Knowing God

105

WHAT APPLICATION TODAY?
? Why do Christian elders need to be committed to justice?—Micah 3:9.
? Zechariah 8:16 gives what direction for elders and others?
? What manifestations of partiality should
we be alert to avoid, and why?—Malachi 2:
7-9; 1 Timothy 5:21, 22.
may need to o?er assistance. (Philippians 4:2, 3)
The elders should certainly strive earnestly to o?er
“the judgment of peace,” attempting to restore peace
between contending parties. The Scriptural counsel
they o?er and their attitude in doing so should promote peace in the congregation and peace with God.
Thus it will be evident that they truly know Jehovah
and his justice.
24

The two areas mentioned above illustrate that it

is vital to apply in our daily lives the advice about
justice recorded by the 12 prophets. What a blessing
it is when we and those around us “let justice roll
forth”!
106

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER SEVEN

S ERVE J EHOVAH A CCORDING
TO H IS H IGH S TANDARDS
“JEHOVAH will not do good, and he will not do
bad.” That is how people in Jerusalem felt in Zephaniah’s day. They reasoned that Jehovah did not expect them to live up to any particular standards.
Zephaniah said that they were “congealing upon
their dregs,” the particles that settle to the bottom of
stored wine. He meant that the people wanted to be
settled in their comfortable way of life, undisturbed
by any declaration of divine intervention in their affairs. Yet, God told those Jews that he would “carefully search Jerusalem with lamps” and “give attention to” those who ignored his standards. Yes,
Jehovah has standards, and he cares how his people
view them.—Zephaniah 1:12.
2

Today, too, many people loathe the thought of

conforming to standards. You may hear them say,
1. How did those in Jerusalem in Zephaniah’s day feel about Jehovah’s
standards?
2. Where you live, what is the general attitude toward having standards?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

107

“Just do as you please!” Some reason, ‘If I don’t have
enough money or can’t satisfy my desires, it’s OK to
do whatever I need to do to change that.’ They pay
little heed to how God feels or what he may require
of them. What about you? Does the Creator’s setting
of standards sound appealing to you?
3

Many who reject the idea of having to live up to

God’s standards readily accept man’s standards in
various aspects of life. For example, what about the
quality of water? Most governments set standards for
the quality of water that they want to be available. But what if the standards are too low? That
may cause diarrhea and other waterborne diseases,
with children being especially a?ected. More likely, though, you are bene?ting from the high standards set for drinking water. “If there were no standards, we would soon notice,” says the International
Organization for Standardization. “We are usually
unaware of the role played by standards in raising levels of quality, safety, reliability, e?ciency and
3, 4. Why do you appreciate having standards?
108

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

interchangeability—as well as in providing such bene?ts at an economical cost.”
4

If you agree that there is value in having stan-

dards in various aspects of life, is it not reasonable
to expect God to have high standards for the people
called by his name?—Acts 15:14.

ARE DIVINE STANDARDS REAS ONABLE?
5

When you are building a house, standards are im-

portant. If one wall is not vertical, the entire building may tilt. Or gaps between the walls may make the
house uninhabitable. That was the idea of a vision
that Amos, prophesying in the ninth century B.C.E.,
had regarding the condition of the ten-tribe nation of
Israel. He saw Jehovah stationed on a wall with “a
plummet in his hand.” God said: “Here I am setting
a plummet in the midst of my people Israel. I shall
no more do any further excusing of it.” (Amos 7:7, 8)
A plummet is a weight that hangs on a cord; it is used
to determine vertical accuracy. The ?gurative wall on
which Amos saw Jehovah standing was “made with a
5. How did Jehovah demonstrate through Amos the importance of meeting His standards?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

109

plummet.” That wall stood upright, or plumb. However, by Amos’ day the Israelites no longer met the
test of spiritual uprightness—they were like a tilting
wall that needed to be torn down before it fell.
6

As you study the 12 prophets, you will ?nd this

recurring point: It is vital to conform to God’s standards. The messages in those books were not all denunciations of a people not measuring up to God’s
high standards. At times, when he examined them, Jehovah determined that his people did meet his standards. That they could do so bears out that his standards are reasonable; it is possible for imperfect
humans like us to meet them. Consider an example.
7

After the repatriated Jews laid the temple founda-

tion, their rebuilding work ground to a halt. So God
sent his prophets Haggai and Zechariah to encourage
the people to resume the project. In one vision to
Zechariah, Jehovah described Zerubbabel, governor
of Judah, as having “the plummet in [his] hand” when
6. (a) What is a key idea in the writings of the 12 prophets? (b) What basis do you have for saying that God’s standards are reasonable?
7. How does Zechariah help us to see that it is possible for imperfect humans to meet Jehovah’s standards?
110

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

he placed the headstone that gave the temple its ?nishing touch. The temple was built in harmony with
divine standards. (Zechariah 4:10) But consider this
interesting detail concerning the completed temple:
“These seven are the eyes of Jehovah. They are roving about in all the earth.” God saw Zerubbabel put
the headstone in place, and with all-perceiving eyes,
He saw that the rebuilt temple withstood His scrutiny, met His standards! The point is that even though
Jehovah has high standards, humans can meet them.
With encouragement from Haggai and Zechariah,
Zerubbabel and his people had done so. Like Zerubbabel, you too can live up to God’s expectations.
How reassuring it is to know that!

WHY ACCEPT JEHOVAH’S STANDARDS?
8

As the Creator, God has the right to set standards

for mankind and to expect us to observe them. (Revelation 4:11) Jehovah does not have to spell out
everything, for he gave humans a conscience as a
8, 9. (a) Why is it appropriate for Jehovah to set standards for humans?
(b) Why was it ?tting that God required the Israelites to keep his commandments?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

111

valuable guide. (Romans 2:14, 15) God did tell the
?rst humans not to eat from “the tree of the knowledge of good and bad,” which represented God’s
right to set standards of good and bad. You are familiar with what happened. (Genesis 2:17; 3:1-19) Alluding to the wrong choice that Adam had made, Hosea wrote: “[The Israelites] themselves, like earthling
man, have overstepped the covenant.” (Hosea 6:7)
Thus Hosea shows the deliberate nature of the Israelites’ sin.
9

What was that sin? “They have broken the [Law]

covenant.” (New International Version) By rescuing his
people out of Egypt, God became their owner and
clearly had the right to set standards for them. The
Israelites accepted the covenant with Jehovah, thus
agreeing to live according to those standards. (Exodus 24:3; Isaiah 54:5) Still, many of them failed to
practice the Law. They became guilty of bloodshed,
murder, and fornication.—Hosea 6:8-10.
10

Jehovah sent prophets like Hosea to help His

dedicated people. At the conclusion of his prophetic
10. How did God try to help those who failed to measure up to his standards?
112

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

book, Hosea declared: “Who is wise, that he may understand these things? Discreet, that he may know
them? For the ways of Jehovah are upright, and the
righteous are the ones who will walk in them; but the
transgressors are the ones who will stumble in them.”
(Hosea 14:9) Earlier in Hosea chapter 14, we ?nd that
the prophet highlighted the need to return to Jehovah. The wise ones would understand that Jehovah
outlined upright ways in which his people should
walk. As a dedicated servant of God, you no doubt
sincerely desire to remain as such, walking in the
ways of Jehovah.
11

Hosea 14:9 also turns our attention to the posi-

tive aspects of observing an upright course. Blessings
and bene?ts come from measuring up to God’s requirements. As the Creator, he knows our makeup.
What he expects of us is for our good. To illustrate
the relationship between us and God, we might think
of an automobile and its manufacturer. The maker
knows how the auto is designed and put together. He
knows that the car requires an oil change every
11. Why do you want to keep God’s commandments?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

113

so often. What would happen if you ignored that
standard, perhaps reasoning that the car is running
well? Much sooner than might otherwise be so, the
engine would deteriorate and fail. The same is true
of humans. Our Creator has given us commandments. Keeping them is for our bene?t. (Isaiah 48:17,
18) Appreciating that we do bene?t gives us additional reason to live up to his standards, to keep his commandments.—Psalm 112:1.
12

The greatest reward for observing God’s com-

mandments is having a stronger bond with God.
When we live by his standards and see how reasonable and bene?cial they are, our a?ection for their
Author deepens. The prophet Micah beautifully depicted that deepened relationship: “All the peoples,
for their part, will walk each one in the name of its
god; but we, for our part, shall walk in the name of
Jehovah our God to time inde?nite, even forever.”
(Micah 4:5) What a privilege we have to walk in the
name of Jehovah, supporting his reputation and rec12. How can walking in God’s name strengthen our bond with him?
114

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ognizing his authority in our life! As a natural consequence, we want to re?ect his qualities. Individually, let us work to strengthen our bond with God.
—Psalm 9:10.
13

Those who live up to God’s standards and walk

in the divine name are said to fear God’s name. That
is not negative or bad. Jehovah assures such ones:
“To you who are in fear of my name the sun of righteousness will certainly shine forth, with healing in
its wings; and you will actually go forth and paw the
ground like fattened calves.” (Malachi 4:2) In the ful?llment of this prophecy, “the sun of righteousness”
is Jesus Christ. (Revelation 1:16) He shines forth now
with spiritual healing and, in time, will shine forth
with physical healing for mankind. The joy of the
healed ones is likened to that of fattened calves that
“go forth and paw the ground,” excited and delighted to be free. Have you not already experienced a
large measure of such liberation?—John 8:32.
14

Another way that you can bene?t from adhering to

13. Why is fearing God’s name not negative or bad?
14, 15. In what ways do you bene?t from adhering to Jehovah’s standards?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

115

HOW WOULD YOU RESPOND?
? How is God a?ected by your observing or
not observing his standards?—Amos 7:7-9.
? Why do you say that Jehovah’s standards are
reasonable?—Zechariah 4:10.
? What reasons do you have for accepting
God’s standards?—Micah 4:5; Malachi 4:2;
2 Corinthians 5:15; Revelation 4:11.
God’s standards is in improved relations with fellow
humans. Habakkuk declared ?ve woes—against those
who coveted, those who went after dishonest gain,
those who shed blood, those who schemed to commit
sexual wrongs, and those who worshipped idols. (Habakkuk 2:6-19) The fact that Jehovah declared these
woes shows clearly that he has set standards as to how
we should live our life. But note this point: Four of
the wrongs mentioned have to do with how we treat
our fellow man. If we cultivate God’s view, we will not
harm our neighbors. Thus, our relationship with most
of them should improve.
116

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

15

A third way that we bene?t involves family hap-

piness. People today often view divorce as the ultimate solution to marital discord. Yet, through the
mouth of the prophet Malachi, Jehovah stated: “He
has hated a divorcing.” (Malachi 2:16) We will consider Malachi 2:16 in more detail later, but at this
point note from it that God has wisely set standards
to be observed by members of the family; to the extent that they do so, peace will prevail. (Ephesians 5:
28, 33; 6:1-4) Admittedly, we are all imperfect, so
problems will arise. Yet, in the book of Hosea, the
One “to whom every family in heaven and on earth
owes its name” gave an object lesson that reveals how
to solve even some extreme marital problems. That
too we will examine in a later chapter of this book.
(Ephesians 3:15) Let us now see what else is involved
in observing God’s standards.

“HATE WHAT IS BAD,
AND LOVE WHAT IS G O OD”
16

The ?rst man, Adam, made a foolish choice as to

whose standards of good and bad were best. Will we
16. How does Amos 5:15 relate to God’s standards?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

117

choose more wisely? Amos admonished us to have
strong feelings about this, urging: “Hate what is bad,
and love what is good.” (Amos 5:15) William Rainey
Harper, late professor of Semitic languages and literatures at the University of Chicago, noted about this
verse: “The standard of good and evil, in [Amos’]
mind, is conformity with Yahweh’s will.” This is a
central concept that we can learn from the 12 prophets. Are we willing to accept Jehovah’s standards of
good and bad? Those high standards are revealed to
us in the Bible and explained by mature, experienced
Christians who make up “the faithful and discreet
slave.”—Matthew 24:45-47.
17

Our hating what is bad helps us to refrain from

things that displease God. For example, a man may
be aware of the dangers of Internet pornography and
try to turn away from viewing it. Yet, how does ‘the
man he is inside’ feel about the content of pornographic Web sites? (Ephesians 3:16) By applying the
divine exhortation found at Amos 5:15, he will ?nd
17, 18. (a) Why is it vital to hate what is bad? (b) Illustrate how we can
cultivate strong hatred for what is bad.
118

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

it easier to cultivate hatred for what is bad. He may
thus be victorious in his spiritual struggle.
18

Consider another example. Can you imagine pros-

trating yourself before idols of sex worship? Just
the thought of it is repugnant, is it not? Still, Hosea spoke of the Israelites’ forefathers committing
immorality in front of Baal of Peor. (Numbers 25:
1-3; Hosea 9:10) Apparently, Hosea mentioned this
incident because Baal worship was a major sin of the
ten-tribe kingdom of Israel. (2 Kings 17:16-18; Hosea
2:8, 13) We can just imagine the disgusting scene: The
Israelites were bending down to idols during sexual
orgies. Our knowing how God condemned that can
help each one of us to ?ght against snares that Satan sets via the Internet. Today, many are idolizing beautiful women and handsome men who are
featured in popular entertainment. How di?erent,
though, for those of us who have learned from the
prophets’ warnings about idol worship!

KEEP G OD’S WORD IN MIND
19

As you work at upholding God’s high standards

19. What can you learn from Jonah’s actions in the belly of a big ?sh?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

119

amid temptations and di?culties, you may at times
feel incapable or at a loss to know what to do. If your
mental or emotional power seems scanty, how can
you face a critical situation successfully? (Proverbs
24:10) Well, there is something to learn from Jonah,
whom we know was an imperfect man with failings.
Recall what he did in the belly of a big ?sh. He
prayed to Jehovah. Notice the content of his prayer.
20

When Jonah prayed to God “out of the belly of

Sheol,” he used many words and phrases that he was
familiar with, words of the psalms. (Jonah 2:2) He
was severely distressed and beseeched Jehovah for
mercy, yet the words of David came to Jonah’s lips.
For example, compare the words of Jonah 2:3, 5 with
those of Psalm 69:1, 2.1 Is it not clear that Jonah
had become acquainted with psalms of David that
were available to the prophet? The words and expressions of inspired psalms welled up within him. Jonah had God’s inspired word ‘in his inward parts.’
(Psalm 40:8) If you are confronted with an emotion1 Compare also Jonah 2:2, 4-9 with Psalm 18:6; 31:22; 30:3; 142:3; 31:6;
and 3:8 in the order of use by Jonah.

20. How could you equip yourself to do what Jonah did?
120

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ally draining situation, can you call to mind some appropriate sayings of God? Your now becoming ever
more familiar with God’s Word may well prove to be
extremely helpful in the future as you face decisions
and resolve problems in line with God’s standards.

HAVE A HEALTHY FEAR OF G OD
21

Of course, just having the Word of God in your

treasure store is not enough to make you stick to Jehovah’s standards. The prophet Micah gives added
insight into what you need in order to apply the
Word of God: “The person of practical wisdom will
fear your name.” (Micah 6:9) To be a person of practical wisdom, one who can apply in his own life what
he knows, you must cultivate fear of God’s name.
22

How can you learn to fear God’s name? Well,

consult the postexilic prophet Haggai. In his very
short book, only 38 verses long, he used the name Jehovah 35 times! When Jehovah commissioned Haggai
to prophesy, in 520 B.C.E., 16 years had passed with
21. What do you need to cultivate in order to stick to God’s standards?
22, 23. (a) Why did Jehovah send Haggai to the repatriated Jews?
(b) You have what reason for con?dence that you will be able to observe
God’s standards?
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

121

little work done on the rebuilding of the temple in
Jerusalem. God’s people had become disheartened
because of opposition by their enemies. (Ezra 4:4, 5)
The people reasoned that the time to rebuild the temple had not come. Jehovah admonished them: “Set
your heart upon your ways. . . . Build the house, that
I may take pleasure in it and I may be glori?ed.”
—Haggai 1:2-8.
23

Governor Zerubbabel, High Priest Joshua, and

“all the remaining ones of the people began to listen
to the voice of Jehovah their God, . . . and the people began to fear because of Jehovah.” At that, God
responded: “I am with you people.” What reassurance! With the help of God’s spirit, the people “began to enter in and to do the work in the house of
Jehovah.” (Haggai 1:12-14) The healthy fear of displeasing God moved people who had been fainthearted to act despite opposition.
24

How about you? If you realize what the divine

standards are in the situation you face, will you have
24, 25. Using speci?c examples, illustrate how you can apply the principles set out in this chapter.
122

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

the courage needed to fear Jehovah instead of men?
Perhaps you are a young woman, and on the job,
there is a man who does not share your godly principles. Still, he is kind and attentive. Will a scripture
come to mind, reminding you of Jehovah’s standards
and the dangers of ignoring them? What about Hosea 4:11? “Fornication and wine and sweet wine are
what take away good motive.” Combined with that,
will your fear of God move you to stick to his standard and say no if that man invites you to some social event? If he starts to ?irt, fear of displeasing your
loving God can help you to ‘take to ?ight.’—Genesis
39:12; Jeremiah 17:9.
25

Now let us return to the example of a man trying

to resist the pull of Internet pornography. Will he recall the words of Psalm 119:37, which are in the form
of a prayer? “Make my eyes pass on from seeing what
is worthless.” And will he mentally review Jesus’
words in the Sermon on the Mount? “Everyone that
keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion
for her has already committed adultery with her in
his heart.” (Matthew 5:28) Having fear of Jehovah
Serve Jehovah According to His High Standards

123

HOW CAN THE FOLLOWING HELP YOU
TO OBSERVE GOD’S STANDARDS?
? Hating bad—Amos 5:15.
? Having God’s Word in your treasure store
—Jonah 2:4-9.
? Cultivating fear of Jehovah—Haggai 1:12-14.
and the desire to live up to his standards should
move a Christian to turn away from what can corrupt. Whenever you are tempted to think or act contrary to God’s standards, try to cultivate increased
godly fear. And bear in mind what Jehovah tells you
through Haggai: “I am with you.”
26

Yes, you can serve Jehovah according to his high

standards and be bene?ted in doing so. As you continue to examine the 12 prophetic books, God’s standards, or what he requires of each of us, will become
ever clearer. The next section of this book will take
up three major areas in which Jehovah sets admirable standards: our conduct, our dealings with others,
and our family life.
26. What will we yet consider?
124

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

S E C T I O N

3

P LEASE G OD IN
YOUR C ONDUCT AND
D EALINGS
How would you answer the question: “What is Jehovah asking back from you?” (Micah 6:8) The
writings of the 12 prophets o?er insights into this. As
you will see in Chapters 8 to 10 of this book, those
writings can help you to cope with such challenges as
how to be truthful in all you say and how to avoid violence. You will also discover practical advice that they
o?er about family life, advice that you can likely use.

CHAPTER EIGHT

‘W HAT I S J EHOVAH
A SKING F ROM YOU?’
PICTURE this scene: A girl is startled by violent
pounding on the door. She fears that it is the corrupt merchant who is demanding the money her
family owes him. He has exploited many by using
false weights and charging illegal interest. To get
away with that, he bribes town leaders, who ignore
the victims’ outcries. The girl feels defenseless; her
father has abandoned her family for a younger woman. She and her mother may be sold as slaves.
2

That scenario is a composite of some of the

practices that the 12 prophets decried. (Amos 5:12;
8:4-6; Micah 6:10-12; Zephaniah 3:3; Malachi 2:13-16;
3:5) If you had been living then, how would you
have reacted? As negative as the picture seems, you
can be heartened by positive features of Jehovah’s
dealings with his people during the days of those
1, 2. Why is it heartening to note how Jehovah reacted to the moral decay of his ancient people?
126

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

prophets. Yes, you can see from those 12 books that
God stressed lofty qualities and attitudes. His encouragement can fortify your morals, motivate you
to do good, and move you to praise him. Because
Jehovah’s day of judgment is fast approaching, your
noting the positive message in those books can give
you insight into what God is asking of you. Start by
looking at Micah’s day, in the eighth century B.C.E.

WHAT IS JEHOVAH ASKING FROM YOU?
3

Reading Micah’s book, you might at ?rst feel

that it is a litany of accusations against the wayward
Israelites. Granted, Jehovah was not blind to the
moral decay of his dedicated people, including those
he described as “haters of what is good and lovers
of badness.” (Micah 3:2; 6:12) Still, along with the
denunciation, there is one of the Bible’s most appealing and motivating admonitions. Micah focuses
on the Source of righteous standards and asks this
thought-provoking question: “What is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love
3, 4. (a) What appealing entreaty is included in the book of Micah?
(b) How are you personally a?ected by the question at Micah 6:8?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

127

kindness and to be modest in walking with your
God?”—Micah 6:8.
4

Do you discern here an entreaty from our Cre-

ator? We are lovingly reminded of positive attitudes
that we are in a position to adopt rather than letting ourselves get sidetracked by prevailing wickedness. Jehovah knows that as loyal humans we want
to cultivate godly qualities, and he does not lose
faith in us. How would you respond if you were personally asked: ‘What is Jehovah asking from you?’
Can you pinpoint areas in your life where God’s
moral standards are making—or should be making—a di?erence? Your relationship with God and
the quality of your life will greatly improve as you
keep measuring up to those standards. With a global
paradise just before you, take encouragement from
this exhortation: “Sow seed for yourselves in righteousness; reap in accord with loving-kindness. Till
for yourselves arable land, when there is time for
searching for Jehovah until he comes and gives instruction in righteousness to you.” (Hosea 10:12)
128

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Now let us examine some key points in the ?ne advice of Micah 6:8.

“BE MODEST”
5

Signi?cantly, Micah states that Jehovah is ask-

ing us to “be modest in walking with” Him. Being
modest can only bene?t us because “wisdom is with
the modest ones.” (Proverbs 11:2) Being modest includes being aware of the limitations Adamic sin imposes on us. Our admitting that we are born in sin
is a vital ?rst step in striving to avoid any willful
sin.—Romans 7:24, 25.
6

Why is modesty coupled with lowliness of mind

so important in avoiding willful sin? Well, a modest person recognizes the power that sin can exert.
(Psalm 51:3) Hosea helps us to understand that sin
can be seductive and that it always proves devastating in the end. For example, Jehovah promised
to “hold an accounting” for the disobedience of
his ancient people. Does that sound as if those
5. Why is it important to “be modest” in walking with God?
6. How can we bene?t if we modestly recognize sin’s consequences?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

129

EXEMPLARY MODESTY AND CANDOR
Jonah displayed frankness and modesty that is
not found among non-Biblical writers. He freely told of his own disobedience and of episodes
when he lacked trust in Jehovah. He did not try
to cover over his improper attitude toward his
commission or toward God’s sparing of the Ninevites. What a ?ne example of modesty for us to
imitate!
immodest sinners could escape all consequences?
They may have hoped to, since sin often deludes
and enslaves. More important, sin separates sinners
from God, possibly causing them to reach this extreme: “Their dealings do not permit of a returning
to their God.” Willful sin will erode the moral
?ber of the wrongdoer’s life, transforming him into
a ‘practicer of what is harmful.’ In addition, sin
makes the sinner’s life fruitless. Granted, for a
while he may seem successful, but the unrepentant
sinner cannot expect to have God’s approval.—Hosea 1:4; 4:11-13; 5:4; 6:8.
130

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

7

Modest people also admit that they need God’s

direction to avoid the sad consequences of sin.
Micah foresaw a time—our day—when multitudes
would eagerly seek to be ‘instructed about Jehovah’s
ways’ and to “walk in his paths.” Such meek ones
look for the “law” and “the word of Jehovah.” You
are probably ?nding your happy place among those
who desire to “walk in the name of Jehovah” by responding to his requirements. Even so, like Micah,
you might be interested in additional ways to remain “morally clean.” (Micah 4:1-5; 6:11) Modestly
seeking to do what Jehovah is asking from you will
greatly assist you.

CULTIVATE ELEVATED MORALS
8

In promoting our spiritual and physical welfare,

Jehovah asks us to be morally chaste despite the
degradation in the world around us. (Malachi 2:15)
We are inundated by sexually charged messages.
Many people feel that viewing pornographic pictures and ?lms, reading about lewd sexual activities,
7. How do modest people respond to Jehovah’s direction?
8. What have you noted about the morals of the world today?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

131

and listening to songs with suggestive lyrics are a
normal part of life. Beyond that, there are people
who show disrespect for women, considering them
little more than sexual objects. Or youths in school
may pepper their talk with obscene jokes and sexual innuendos. How can you resist such corrupting
in?uences?
9

The 12 prophets that we are considering of-

fer precious admonition. They lived before the era
of the multiscreen theater and the video store,
yet in their time there were phallic symbols, socalled sacred prostitution, and shameless promiscuity. (1 Kings 14:24; Isaiah 57:3, 4; Habakkuk 2:15)
You can see evidence of that in what the prophets
wrote: “As to the men, it is with the harlots that
they get o? to themselves, and with the female temple prostitutes that they sacri?ce.” “A man and his
own father have gone to the same girl, for the
purpose of profaning my holy name.” Some regularly made “payment for prostitutes” at fertility
9. How did many fail to uphold Jehovah’s standards during the time of the
12 prophets?
132

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

rites.1 Adultery was rampant, with unfaithful spouses “going after [their] passionate lovers.”—Hosea 2:
13; 4:2, 13, 14; Amos 2:7; Micah 1:7, Contemporary
English Version.
10

You probably realize that sexual immorality re-

?ects a person’s attitude and motives. (Mark 7:2022) Jehovah said about his immoral people that
“the very spirit of fornication [“lusting for sex,”
CEV] has caused them to wander o?” and that “they
have carried on nothing but loose conduct.” (Hosea
4:12; 6:9)2 Zechariah mentioned “the spirit of uncleanness.” (Zechariah 13:2) The people’s course involved a brazen attitude, disregard or even contempt for Jehovah’s standards and authority. Thus,
in order to correct his motives, a person would
1 Bible translator Joseph Rotherham says of the nations of Canaan,
whose conduct the Israelites copied: “Their very worship was grossly
sensual and revoltingly cruel. In honour of their deities women surrendered their virtue. Their sacred places were brothels. The generative organs were openly represented by disgusting symbols. The peoples had
holy (!) prostitutes, male and female.”
2 God’s people were also guilty of spiritual fornication. They sought
illicit relationships with pagan nations and mixed Baal worship with
true worship.

10. (a) What is mainly behind immoral conduct? (b) How did God’s ancient people become guilty of spiritual fornication?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

133

WHAT CAN YOU LEARN
? from Jehovah’s appeal that you live according to his standards?—Zechariah 6:15;
Malachi 3:16, 18.
? by meditating on the nature and the sad
consequences of sin?—Malachi 4:1;
Romans 6:12-14; 1 Corinthians 6:18.
? from the moral lapses of God’s ancient
people?—Hosea 8:7; 10:12; 14:9.
have to change his thinking and his heart condition
radically. Realizing this should make Christians
even more thankful for the help they receive to
avoid immorality and its tragic consequences.

PURSUE CHASTITY
11

You may have seen that loose morals often

break up families, deprive children of parental guidance, lead to loathsome diseases, and give rise to
life-destroying abortions. Those who disregard the
Creator in matters of sexuality frequently experi11. What are some consequences of sexual immorality?
134

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ence physical and emotional harm. Micah wrote:
“Because of the fact that [a person] has become unclean, there is a wrecking; and the wrecking work is
painful.” (Micah 2:10) Knowing this strengthens the
resolve of godly people. They avoid de?ling their
heart and mind by dwelling on impure thoughts.
—Matthew 12:34; 15:18.
12

Christians do not react merely out of fear of dis-

ease or illegitimacy. They see the value of cultivating love for God’s law and adopting his view of sexual morals. Jehovah set in humans a normal desire
for sexual relations as an expression of marital love.
That was part of God’s creative purpose. When kept
in its proper context—marriage—sex works for the
good, bringing a husband and wife together as one
and sometimes resulting in procreation. Nevertheless, when sex is carried on outside of marriage, it
is powerfully destructive, as borne out by what the
12 prophets depicted. Immoral sex practices led to
God’s disapproval. That was a very high price to pay
12. How do we bene?t by accepting Jehovah’s view of sex?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

135

back then, and it would be an equally high price for
any individual to pay today.
13

Hosea implored his contemporaries to remove,

or ‘put away, fornication from before themselves,’
implying that they take concrete action to protect
their morals. (Hosea 2:2) In our case, it is the wise
course to remove ourselves from any compromising
situation. For instance, you may face a recurring
temptation at school or in your neighborhood. You
may not be able to change schools or residences, yet
there may be other ways to distance yourself from
the tempting circumstance and consequently to ‘put
away fornication from before you.’ Make it known
to others that you are a true Christian, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In a clear, respectful way, explain
your values and your beliefs. Be sure that others are
aware that you are resolved to maintain Jehovah’s
high standards. (Amos 5:15) Another means of ‘putting away fornication’ is by avoiding pornography
and questionable entertainment. That may involve
discarding a magazine or ?nding new companions
13. How can we, in a sense, ‘put away fornication’ and avoid temptation?
136

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

—those who love Jehovah and who agree that you
should do what he is asking from you. (Micah 7:5)
Yes, with Jehovah’s help, you can avoid being contaminated by the world’s immorality!

“LOVE KINDNES S”
14

Micah stressed that Jehovah asks us to “love

kindness.” To be kind involves doing good things
rather than anything harmful. Kindness is closely
associated with goodness and moral excellence. It
calls on us to be honest and just in our personal affairs and in our dealings with others. In Chapter 6
of this book, we examined important areas of life,
such as business and money matters, in which justice and honesty play a vital role. But those are not
the only areas of life in which we should be just,
honest, and kind.
15

People who love kindness and who want to do

good toward others strive to be above reproach. Jehovah said to the Israelites who were not ful?lling their material obligations toward pure worship:
14, 15. (a) What does it mean to “love kindness”? (b) How does love of
kindness help us to be above reproach?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

137

“You are robbing me.” (Malachi 3:8) Can you discern ways that one might be “robbing” God today?
What if a Christian has access to funds contributed
for the advancement of Kingdom interests in the local congregation or in another setting? Whose money is it? Such funds ultimately belong to Jehovah,
since they were o?ered for the furtherance of his
worship. (2 Corinthians 9:7) Should anyone think
that he can “borrow” such money to care for a personal emergency or otherwise use dedicated funds
without proper authorization? Of course not. That
would be tantamount to stealing from God! And
it would certainly not be acting kindly or justly
toward those who contributed such funds for God’s
work.—Proverbs 6:30, 31; Zechariah 5:3.
16

Kindness and goodness also move Christians

to avoid covetousness. During Amos’ time, extreme
greed was common. Insatiable predators were willing to ‘sell someone righteous’—their own fellow
worshipper—“for mere silver”! (Amos 2:6) It was
similar in Micah’s time, when the wealthy of Judah
16, 17. (a) How did some manifest greed in the days of Amos and those
of Micah? (b) What is God’s view of covetousness?
138

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

grabbed property from those who were too weak to
defend themselves, taking it by force if necessary.
(Micah 2:2; 3:10) In seizing the land of their fellowmen, those greedy individuals were violating Jehovah’s Law: including the last of the Ten Words and
the regulations against permanent sale of inherited
land.—Exodus 20:13, 15, 17; Leviticus 25:23-28.
17

It might not be as common today for humans to

be sold or enslaved as it was in the days of the
prophets. Yet, what about taking ?nancial advantage
of or exploiting others? A Christian who loves kindness will certainly not exploit his fellow worshippers. For example, he realizes that it would be neither proper nor kind to start a business or promote
an investment scheme that targets fellow believers as the main customers. It would display greed,
which Christians are warned against, to plan on
making money hastily by exploiting fellow Christians. (Ephesians 5:3; Colossians 3:5; James 4:1-5)
Greed can manifest itself in love of money, desire for power or gain, even voraciousness for food
and drink, sex, or other things. Micah showed that
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

139

self-serving, greedy people will “not get satis?ed.”
That is true today too.—Micah 6:14.
18

Jehovah instructed his people to ‘defraud no

alien resident.’ And through Malachi, God declared:
‘I will come near to you people for the judgment, against those turning away the alien resident.’
(Zechariah 7:10; Malachi 3:5) Has the area where
you live been undergoing change because of an in?ux of immigrants or others of a di?erent nationality, race, or background? Perhaps they have moved
there in search of security, jobs, or better living
conditions. How do you view people whose language
and lifestyle di?er from yours? Do you ?nd in yourself any tendencies toward prejudice, which would
be precisely the opposite of kindness?
19

Think how positively people will react if you

show that those who are from other lands or backgrounds are equally deserving of Christian truth.
Kindness would also work against any feeling that
such newcomers are infringing on the use of the
18, 19. (a) What did some of the 12 prophets say about Jehovah’s care
for the “alien resident”? (b) How can showing loving interest in others improve relations where you live?
140

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Kingdom Hall or other resources. The apostle Paul
reminded some ?rst-century Jewish Christians, who
felt a degree of prejudice toward non-Jews, that really no one was deserving; only God’s undeserved
kindness made it possible for anyone to attain to
salvation. (Romans 3:9-12, 23, 24) Kindness to others will move us to rejoice that God’s love is now
reaching many people who previously may have had
little opportunity to hear the good news. (1 Timothy 2:4) People from other lands or backgrounds are
often disadvantaged, so we ought to show them concern and kindness, welcoming them into our midst,
treating each one “like a native” among us.—Leviticus 19:34.

WALK WITH THE TRUE G OD
20

Micah also emphasized walking with God, look-

ing to him as the true God, seeking his guidance.
(Proverbs 3:5, 6; Hosea 7:10) After the Jews returned from exile, some turned to diviners, fortunetellers, and false gods, perhaps for help during a
drought. In reality they invoked wicked spirit forces
20. To whom did some Israelites turn for direction?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

141

to assist them, despite Jehovah’s having clearly condemned all such practices. (Deuteronomy 18:9-14;
Micah 3:6, 11; 5:12; Haggai 1:10, 11; Zechariah 10:
1, 2) Those Jews were getting involved with spirit
creatures who are in opposition to the true God!
21

Today some think that the wicked spirits men-

tioned in the Scriptures are merely symbolic of the
concept of evil. However, the Bible reveals that the
demons are real and are behind astrology, witchcraft, and some types of magic. (Acts 16:16-18; 2 Peter 2:4; Jude 6) The dangers of spiritism are equally real. People in many cultures look to shamans, or
medicine men who claim mysterious powers, and to
sorcerers. Others seek direction from the horoscope
or employ tarot cards, divining rods, Ouija boards,
or special crystals. Even attempts to communicate
with spirits of the dead are quite common. Reportedly, certain statesmen have turned to astrology and
spiritistic mediums for help in decision making. All
of that is clearly contrary to Micah’s advice that we
walk with the true God, following his guidance.
21, 22. (a) What forms of spiritism are common in your area? (b) Why
do true servants of Jehovah not dabble in the occult?
142

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

22

Certainly you—a true servant of Jehovah—must

shun such practices. You can be sure that God never uses magic or the occult to reveal his will or to
exercise his power. Instead, as Amos 3:7 assures us,
Jehovah ‘reveals his con?dential matter to his servants the prophets.’ Moreover, dabbling in the occult can bring one under the in?uence and control
of the leader of the demons, Satan, who is a liar and
whose strategy is to deceive people. He and his minions are out to harm, having always been cruel, even
killing people. (Job 1:7-19; 2:7; Mark 5:5) Understandably, Micah condemned divination and sorceries when he urged us to walk with the true God.
23

True spirituality is found only with Jehovah and

his pure worship. (John 4:24) “Make your requests
of Jehovah,” the prophet Zechariah wrote. (Zechariah 10:1) Even if you experience attacks or temptations caused by wicked spirit forces, remember
that “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah
will get away safe.” (Joel 2:32) This reassurance is
signi?cant as we keep close in mind his great day.
23. Who only can satisfy our proper requests?
‘What Is Jehovah Asking From You?’

143

HOW CAN YOU BENEFIT
? by adopting Jehovah’s view of sexual
morality?—Hosea 3:3; 4:11.
? by applying the 12 prophets’ admonitions
against greed and self-interest?—Micah 7:
5-7; Philippians 2:4.
? by guarding against spiritism and occult
practices?—Micah 5:12; Nahum 3:4;
Malachi 3:5.
24

Clearly, the words at Micah 6:8 provide us with

much food for thought. To build strong morality, we
need proper motives and godly qualities. Hosea offered encouragement for those of us living in “the
?nal part of the days.” He said that during our time,
God-fearing people would seek Jehovah’s goodness.
(Hosea 3:5) Amos con?rmed God’s invitation for us
to do exactly that: “Search for what is good, . . . to
the end that you people may keep living.” We are
also urged: “Love what is good.” (Amos 5:14, 15) If
we do so, we will be refreshed by doing what Jehovah is asking of us.
24. What lessons did you take away from Micah 6:8?
144

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER NINE

D EALING W ITH O THERS
AS G OD D ESIRES
WHAT comes to mind when you hear ancient Tyre
mentioned? Many Christians would think of how
prophecy was ful?lled when Alexander the Great
scraped up debris from the ruins of mainland Tyre
and built a causeway out to the newer island-city of
Tyre and destroyed it. (Ezekiel 26:4, 12; Zechariah
9:3, 4) Yet, would mention of Tyre make you think
about how to treat your spiritual brothers or others
and how not to treat them?
2

Why was Tyre destroyed? “On account of three

revolts of Tyre, . . . on account of their handing over
a complete body of exiles to Edom, and because
they did not remember the covenant of brothers. And
I will send a ?re onto the wall of Tyre.” (Amos 1:
9, 10) In earlier times, King Hiram of Tyre showed
1-3. (a) What might many Christians think of regarding ancient Tyre?
(b) Describe some of the dealings between King Hiram and Israel.
(c) What might we want to consider regarding Tyre?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

145

goodwill toward David and supplied materials for
Solomon’s temple. Solomon made a covenant with
Hiram and gave him cities in Galilee. Hiram called
Solomon “my brother.” (1 Kings 5:1-18; 9:10-13, 2628; 2 Samuel 5:11) When Tyre “did not remember
the covenant of brothers” and sold some of God’s
people into slavery, Jehovah took note of Tyre’s
dealings.
3

What lesson can we draw from the fact that God

judged the Canaanites of Tyre for dealing harshly
with his people? A key lesson involves how we deal
with our spiritual brothers. In previous chapters of
this book, we noted from the 12 prophets some advice about dealing with others, such as being just
in our business practices and chaste in our conduct.
These 12 books, though, contain more indications
of how God desires us to deal with others.

D O NOT REJOICE OVER
ANOTHER’S DIFFICULTY
4

You can ?nd a lesson in God’s condemnation of

4. In what sense were the Edomites “brothers” to Israel, but how did they
treat their “brothers”?
146

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Edom, a land near Israel: “You ought not to watch
the sight in the day of your brother, in the day of
his misfortune; and you ought not to rejoice at the
sons of Judah in the day of their perishing.” (Obadiah 12) The Tyrians may have been “brothers” as
to commercial activities, but the Edomites were in a
real sense “brothers” to Israel, for they had descended from Esau, Jacob’s twin. Even Jehovah called the
Edomites Israel’s “brothers.” (Deuteronomy 2:1-4)
Hence, it was truly hateful of the Edomites to rejoice when the Jews met calamity at the hands of
the Babylonians.—Ezekiel 25:12-14.
5

Clearly, God did not approve of how the Edom-

ites dealt with their Jewish brothers. We might ask,
though, ‘How would God evaluate the way I deal
with my brothers?’ One area of concern is how we
view and treat a brother when things have not gone
smoothly. For example, imagine that a Christian offended you or had a problem with one of your relatives. If you have “a cause for complaint,” will you
5. In what situations might we show a spirit like that of the Edomites?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

147

harbor resentment, not putting the matter behind
you or not attempting to settle it? (Colossians 3:13;
Joshua 22:9-30; Matthew 5:23, 24) Doing so could affect your actions toward the brother; you might act
coolly, avoiding his company or speaking negatively about him. Extending the example, imagine that
this brother later erred, perhaps even needing counsel or correction from the congregation elders. (Galatians 6:1) Would you re?ect the Edomites’ spirit
and rejoice over the brother’s di?culty? How would
God want you to act?
6

Jehovah had Zechariah mention His desire that

we “scheme out nothing bad against one another in
[our] hearts.” (Zechariah 7:9, 10; 8:17) This advice
is pertinent when we feel that a brother has hurt us
or wronged someone in our family. In such cases, it
is easy to ‘scheme out bad in our hearts’ and then
to re?ect that in our deeds. On the other hand, God
wants us to imitate his positive example. Recall that
Micah wrote that Jehovah is “pardoning error and
6. In contrast with Zechariah 7:10, what does Micah 7:18 suggest that
we do?
148

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

passing over transgression.”1 (Micah 7:18) How can
we apply that in practical ways?
7

We may feel hurt over what was done to us or

to our relative, but really, how serious is it? The Bible outlines steps for settling di?erences, even a sin
against a brother. Still, it is often best just to overlook the error or the o?ense, to ‘pass over transgression.’ Ask yourself: ‘Might this be one of the
77 times that I should forgive him? Why not simply
forget it?’ (Matthew 18:15-17, 21, 22) Even if the offense seems signi?cant now, will it be so a thousand
years from now? Draw a basic lesson from the comment at Ecclesiastes 5:20 about a worker’s enjoying
food and drink: “Not often will he remember the
days of his life, because the true God is preoccupying him with the rejoicing of his heart.” As that man
happily focuses on his current pleasure, he tends to
1 As to “passing over transgression,” one scholar says that the Hebrew
metaphor is “taken from the conduct of a traveller who passes on without noticing an object to which he does not wish to give his attention.
The idea [is not that God is unobservant of sin] but that he does not
mark it in particular cases with a view to punishment; that he does not
punish, but forgive[s].”

7. Why might we choose simply to forget an o?ense?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

149

forget the problems of his daily life. Can we imitate
that attitude? If we focus on the joys of our Christian brotherhood, we may be able to forget issues
that are not lastingly important, ones that we will
not recall in the new world. That is quite di?erent
from rejoicing over another’s di?culty or remembering o?enses.

TELL OTHERS THE TRUTH
8

The 12 prophetic books also highlight how much

God desires that we be truthful in our dealings. Of
course, we exert ourselves in speaking “the truth of
that good news” to others. (Colossians 1:5; 2 Corinthians 4:2; 1 Timothy 2:4, 7) What may be more of
a challenge, though, is adhering to truth in daily
speech with our family and spiritual brothers, conversation that covers a wide variety of topics and
situations. Why may that be so?
9

Who of us has not said or done something un-

kind and then later been confronted about it? We
8. We face what challenge as to speaking the truth?
9. When might we be tempted to speak less than the truth, but what should
we ask ourselves?
150

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

likely felt embarrassed or somewhat guilty. Such
feelings can lead a person to deny an error or o?er
some “explanation” that twists the truth in order to
excuse the wrong or make it appear correct. Or in
an uncomfortable situation, we might be tempted to
mention only selected details, editing them to color
the facts. Hence, what we say might technically be
true yet give a totally di?erent impression. While
this may not be ?agrant lying, such as is common
in the world today, is it really ‘speaking truth each
one with his neighbor,’ or brother? (Ephesians 4:15,
25; 1 Timothy 4:1, 2) When a Christian phrases
things in such a way that he inwardly knows is leading brothers to a wrong conclusion, to believe something that is really not true, not accurate, how do
you think God feels?
10

The prophets realized that even men and wom-

en dedicated to Jehovah at times ignore what he
wants from them. Hosea expressed God’s feelings
about some in his day: “Despoiling to them, for
10. How do the prophets describe a course common in ancient Israel and
Judah?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

151

they have transgressed against me! And I myself
proceeded to redeem them, but they themselves have
spoken lies even against me.” Beyond telling direct
and undeniable lies against Jehovah, some gave in
to “the pronouncing of curses and practicing of deception,” perhaps distorting facts so as to mislead
others. (Hosea 4:1, 2; 7:1-3, 13; 10:4; 12:1) Hosea
wrote those words in Samaria, the northern kingdom. Were things better in Judah? Micah tells us:
“Her own rich men have become full of violence, and
her own inhabitants have spoken falsehood, and
their tongue is tricky in their mouth.” (Micah 6:12)
It is good that we be aware of how those prophets
condemned the “practicing of deception” and those
whose “tongue is tricky in their mouth.” Thus even
Christians, who would certainly not tell deliberate
lies, can ask: ‘Might I at times practice deception or
have a tricky tongue in my mouth? What does God
desire of me in this respect?’
11

On the positive side, God also used the proph-

11. What do the prophets reveal about God’s will as to our speech?
152

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ets to make clear the good that he desires of us.
Zechariah 8:16 says: “These are the things that you
people should do: Speak truthfully with one another. With truth and the judgment of peace do your
judging in your gates.” In Zechariah’s day the gates
were public locations where older men handled judicial cases. (Ruth 4:1; Nehemiah 8:1) Nonetheless,
Zechariah did not say that this was the only circumstance in which to speak honestly. We must be honest in formal situations, but we are also urged:
“Speak truthfully with one another.” That includes
in the privacy of our home when speaking with our
marriage mate or close relatives. It also applies to
our everyday conversations with spiritual brothers
and sisters, whether we are speaking face-to-face,
talking on the telephone, or communicating in another way. They have every reason to expect that
what we are saying is the truth. Christian parents
should stress to their children how vital it is to avoid
falsehoods. Young ones can thus grow up aware that
God expects them to avoid a tricky tongue and to
be truly honest in what they say.—Zephaniah 3:13.
Dealing With Others as God Desires

153

WHAT DOES JEHOVAH DESIRE?
? How can Jehovah’s example help us deal
with a brother who has o?ended us?—Hosea
14:2; Micah 7:18; Malachi 2:10, 11.
? Comparing Hosea 4:1 with Zechariah 8:16
shows that Jehovah expects what of us in
our dealings?
? What aspect of your dealings with others
would you like to improve?
12

A youth or an adult who holds to the way

of truthfulness agrees with Zechariah’s exhortation:
“Love truth and peace.” (Zechariah 8:19) And note
Malachi’s description of what Jehovah saw exempli?ed by His Son: “The very law of truth proved to
be in his mouth, and there was no unrighteousness
to be found on his lips. In peace and in uprightness
he walked with me.” (Malachi 2:6) Would Jehovah
want anything less of us? Remember, we have his
entire Word available, including the 12 prophets with
all the lessons we can draw from them.
12. What valuable lessons can we learn from the prophetic books?
154

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

AVOID VIOLENCE IN YOUR DEALINGS
13

Micah 6:12 tells us that one way in which God’s

ancient people mistreated others was ‘they spoke
falsehood, and their tongue was tricky in their
mouth.’ However, that verse identi?ed yet another
serious defect. It mentioned that the ‘rich men had
become full of violence.’ How was that, and what
lesson can we draw from it?
14

Consider the reputation of some nations locat-

ed near God’s people. To the northeast was Assyria, with its capital, Nineveh, about which Nahum
wrote: “Woe to the city of bloodshed. She is all full
of deception and of robbery. Prey does not depart!”
(Nahum 3:1) The Assyrians were known for aggressive warfare and cruelty to prisoners of war—some
prisoners were burned or skinned alive, and others
were blinded or had their nose, ears, or ?ngers cut
o?. The book Gods, Graves, and Scholars says: “Nineveh was impressed on the consciousness of mankind by little else than murder, plunder, suppression, and the violation of the weak; by war and all
13. Micah 6:12 sheds light on what other problem that existed?
14, 15. Nations surrounding God’s people had what record as to violence?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

155

manner of physical violence.” We have an eyewitness
to (and possible sharer in) that violence. After hearing Jonah’s message, the king of Nineveh said regarding his people: “Let them cover themselves with
sackcloth, man and domestic animal; and let them
call out to God with strength and come back, each
one from his bad way and from the violence that was
in their hands.”—Jonah 3:6-8.1
15

Gross violence was not con?ned to Assyria.

Edom, to the southeast of Judah, also faced retribution. Why? “As regards Edom, a wilderness of desolate waste it will become, because of the violence to
the sons of Judah, in whose land they shed innocent
blood.” (Joel 3:19) Did the Edomites take that warning to heart and end their violent ways? Some two
centuries later, Obadiah wrote: “Your mighty men
must become terri?ed, O Teman [an Edomite city],
. . . Because of the violence to your brother Jacob,
1 Some 22 miles southeast of Nineveh was Calah (Nimrud), which
Ashurnasirpal rebuilt. The British Museum displays wall panels from
Calah, about which we read: “Ashurnasirpal spared no detail of the ferocity and brutality with which he conducted his campaigns. Prisoners
were hanged from poles or impaled on stakes at the walls of besieged
cities . . . ; young men and maidens were ?ayed alive.”—Archaeology of
the Bible.
156

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

. . . you will have to be cut o? to time inde?nite.”
(Obadiah 9, 10) What, though, about God’s people?
16

Amos revealed the situation in Samaria, the cap-

ital of the northern kingdom: “ ‘See the many disorders in the midst of her and cases of defrauding inside her. And they have not known how to do what is
straightforward,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘those
who are storing up violence and despoiling.’ ” (Amos
3:9, 10) You might think that it would be di?erent
in Judah, where Jehovah’s temple was located. But
Habakkuk, who lived in Judah, asked God: “How
long shall I call to you for aid from violence, and
you do not save? Why is it that you make me see
what is hurtful, and you keep looking upon mere
trouble? And why are despoiling and violence in
front of me?”—Habakkuk 1:2, 3; 2:12.
17

Could it be that violence became common

among God’s people because they allowed themselves to be in?uenced by the attitude that Assyria,
16. Amos and Habakkuk give us insight into what problem existing in their
day?
17. Why might a tendency toward violence have developed among God’s
people?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

157

Edom, or other nations had toward violence? Solomon had warned of such a possibility: “Do not become envious of the man of violence, nor choose any
of his ways.” (Proverbs 3:31; 24:1) Later, Jeremiah
was speci?c: “This is what Jehovah has said: ‘Do not
learn the way of the nations at all.’ ”—Jeremiah 10:2;
Deuteronomy 18:9.
18

If Habakkuk were alive now, would he not be ap-

palled by the violence of our time? Many are steeped
in violence from their youth on. Cartoons that enthrall boys and girls feature violence—one character
tries to smash, blow up, or otherwise destroy another. Before long, many youths graduate to video
games in which they win by shooting, exploding, or
demolishing opponents. “Those are only games,”
some may protest. Still, violent games played on a
home computer or in a video arcade immerse players in violence, shaping their attitudes and reactions.
How true the inspired counsel: “A man of violence
18, 19. (a) If Habakkuk were alive now, how might he feel about modernday expressions of violence? (b) How do you feel about the violence of our
time?
158

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

will seduce his fellow, and certainly causes him to
go in a way that is not good”!—Proverbs 16:29.
19

Though Habakkuk was forced to keep looking

upon mere trouble and the “violence in front of”
him, it grieved him. You might now ask, ‘Would he
be comfortable sitting with me and looking at the
programs I regularly watch on television?’ Ask also,
‘Would he set aside time to be a spectator at socalled sports events that are violent by design, players even wearing protective armor like that of ancient gladiators?’ With certain games, the thrill for
many springs from ?ghts on the court or the ?eld
or those between crazed fans. In some cultures,
many watch violent ?lms and videos centered on
warfare or the martial arts. This may be excused as
history or a display of the nation’s cultural past, but
does that make the violence more acceptable?—Proverbs 4:17.
20

Malachi brings up a related aspect when point-

ing out Jehovah’s view of the treachery of some Jews
toward their wives. “ ‘He has hated a divorcing,’
20. About what sort of violence did Malachi express Jehovah’s view?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

159

IN CONTRAST WITH THE WORLD
? What evidence do you observe that many in
the world ‘drink violence’?—Proverbs 4:17;
Zephaniah 1:9; Malachi 2:17.
? How can you apply Micah 4:3 in the congregation and in your family?
? How has this chapter helped you to see
that we can draw lessons from parts of the
Bible that are considered less often?
Jehovah the God of Israel has said; ‘and the one who
with violence has covered over his garment.’ ” (Malachi 2:16) The Hebrew rendered “with violence has
covered over his garment” has been variously understood. Some scholars take it to mean getting blood
on one’s garment when violently attacking another.
In any case, Malachi was plainly condemning spousal abuse. Yes, Malachi raised the issue of violence
in a domestic context and showed that God disapproves of it.
21

Violence, physical or verbal, in the privacy of a

21. In what situations must Christians avoid violence?
160

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Christian’s home is no more excusable than violence in public; God observes both. (Ecclesiastes 5:8)
While Malachi referred to violence against a wife,
nothing in the Bible makes violence less reprehensible if a man directs it against children or elderly parents. Nor is it excusable if a wife displays it toward
her husband, children, or parents. Granted, in a family of imperfect humans, tensions may arise, causing
irritation and sometimes anger. Still, the Bible advises us: “Be wrathful, and yet do not sin; let the
sun not set with you in a provoked state.”—Ephesians 4:26; 6:4; Psalm 4:4; Colossians 3:19.
22

Some may make excuses for their violent ways,

saying, ‘I am this way because I grew up in a violent family,’ or ‘People from my area or culture are
just more excitable, more explosive.’ However, when
Micah condemned ‘rich men who had become full
of violence,’ he did not suggest that they could not
help it because they had grown up amid violence.
(Micah 6:12) Noah lived when the earth was “?lled
22. How do we know that it is possible to avoid being violent, even if many
around us are otherwise?
Dealing With Others as God Desires

161

with violence,” and his sons grew up surrounded
by it. Did they adopt violent ways? Hardly! “Noah
found favor in the eyes of Jehovah,” and his sons
followed him and were preserved through the Flood.
—Genesis 6:8, 11-13; Psalm 11:5.
23

Earth wide, Jehovah’s Witnesses are known, not

for being violent, but for being peaceable. They respect and comply with Caesar’s laws against violent
deeds. (Romans 13:1-4) They have worked “to beat
their swords into plowshares,” and they strive to pursue peace. (Isaiah 2:4) They endeavor to put on “the
new personality,” a help toward avoiding violence.
(Ephesians 4:22-26) And they observe the ?ne example of Christian elders, who cannot be ‘smiters’ either in word or in deed.—1 Timothy 3:3; Titus 1:7.
24

Yes, we can—and must—deal with others as God

desires. Hosea says: “Who is wise, that he may understand these things? Discreet, that he may know
them? For the ways of Jehovah are upright, and the
righteous are the ones who will walk in them.”—Hosea 14:9.
23, 24. (a) What helps us to avoid being known as violent people?
(b) How does Jehovah feel about those who deal with others as he desires?
162

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER TEN

C ONTRIBUTE TO FAMILY L IFE
T HAT P LEASES G OD
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES are well-known for enjoying a happy family life. Professor Bryan Wilson
of Oxford University wrote: “The Witnesses o?er a
wide range of practical advice . . . on marital relations, moral issues, the rearing of children, and other practical matters. [They] have a great deal to o?er
by way of ?rm advice substantiated in Holy Writ and
integrated into a coherent philosophy of life.” Undoubtedly, you have personally learned much from
God’s Word about how to enjoy a wholesome family life.
2

As the day of Jehovah draws near, Satan is at-

tacking families in particular. Hence, many people
have lost trust in members of their own family, as
was so in the days of Micah. He wrote: “Do not put
1. Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses in general enjoy a happy family life?
2. (a) What have you observed about families in the world today? (b) In
which books of the Bible are we going to look for some guidance about family life?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

163

your faith in a companion. . . . From her who is
lying in your bosom guard the openings of your
mouth. For a son is despising a father; a daughter
is rising up against her mother; a daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law; a man’s enemies are the
men of his household.” (Micah 7:5, 6) You live in a
world where the family arrangement has deteriorated, yet you have fought hard against being negatively in?uenced. Thus, your family life has been rendered more pleasant, more pleasing to God. Likely,
you have applied such texts as Deuteronomy 6:5-9;
Ephesians 5:22–6:4; and Colossians 3:18-21. Have you
ever, though, viewed the books of the 12 prophets
as a source of counsel on happy family life? In this
chapter, we will note a few examples of such counsel in these books. But do not stop at just considering those speci?c points of counsel. Seek to discern
from these examples a basic approach that you can
use in drawing other lessons from these books. At
the end of this chapter, some texts are cited that will
give you practice in doing that, drawing lessons from
those 12 books.
164

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

“HE HAS HATED A DIVORCING”
3

A logical ?rst area of interest is the bond be-

tween husband and wife. Until recent times, most
people did not consider divorce as an easy solution
to marital problems. Obtaining a divorce was usually di?cult; in 19th-century England, it required an
act of Parliament to obtain a divorce. Such views
tended to protect families from disintegrating. Now,
though, things are quite di?erent. The Encyclopædia
Britannica observes: “Divorce rates have markedly increased in many countries since World War II . . .
Attitudes toward divorce have changed dramatically
. . . with the general trend toward tolerance of the
practice.” Divorce is becoming a social phenomenon
even in countries like Korea, where until a decade
ago, divorce was frowned upon. Today, people in
many lands feel that divorce is a viable option for
mates in a troubled marriage.
4

During Malachi’s day in the ?fth century B.C.E.,

divorce was rampant among the Jews. Malachi
3, 4. (a) How do many people today try to solve their marital problems?
(b) What deplorable attitude toward marriage existed in Malachi’s day?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

165

told them: “Jehovah himself has borne witness between you and the wife of your youth, with whom
you yourself have dealt treacherously.” Because of
treacherous dealings on the part of husbands, the
altar of Jehovah was covered with the tears of
betrayed wives, “with weeping and sighing.” And
corrupt priests condoned such cruelty!—Malachi 2:
13, 14.
5

How did Jehovah view the deplorable attitude to-

ward marriage in Malachi’s time? “ ‘He has hated
a divorcing,’ Jehovah the God of Israel has said,”
wrote Malachi. He also a?rmed that Jehovah ‘has
not changed.’ (Malachi 2:16; 3:6) Do you see the
point? God had earlier taken a position against divorce. (Genesis 2:18, 24) He did so in Malachi’s day.
And he still does today. Some people may decide to
walk out of their marriage simply because they are
not satis?ed with their mate. Treacherous though
their heart may be, Jehovah searches through it.
(Jeremiah 17:9, 10) He is aware of any deceit or ma5. (a) How does Jehovah view divorce? (b) Why is acting treacherously toward one’s marriage mate so serious?
166

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

licious scheming behind a divorce, however one may
rationalize it. Yes, “all things are naked and openly
exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an
accounting.”—Hebrews 4:13.
6

Your marriage may not be facing the crisis of a

divorce, yet you do well to keep in mind Jehovah’s view. No one is perfect, so we can expect dif?culties and disagreements in marriage. However,
would you consider divorce an option, an easy way
out? In the heat of a dispute, would you mention
the possibility of a divorce? Many have, but the divine view of the marriage bond recommends that
people try more seriously to make their marriage
work. Granted, Jesus Christ said that there is one
legitimate grounds for divorce—fornication, that is,
all types of sexual intercourse outside of marriage.
Apart from that, what was the thrust of Jesus’ admonition? He told listeners: “What God has yoked
together let no man put apart.” Yes, Jesus upheld Jehovah’s unchanging standard, which Malachi
6. (a) How can having Jehovah’s view of divorce help you? (b) What was
the thrust of Jesus’ advice about divorce?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

167

had mentioned some 450 years earlier.—Matthew
19:3-9.
7

How, then, can Christian mates maintain a strong

bond? Malachi provided this key: “You must guard
yourselves respecting your spirit, and you must
not deal treacherously.” (Malachi 2:16) That means
watching the impelling inclination that we have
within ourselves. If we are ‘guarding our spirit,’ we
will shun temptations to give undue attention to anyone who is not our spouse. (Matthew 5:28) For example, what if we inwardly enjoy receiving the attentions of or ?attery from someone else of the
opposite sex? This would mean that we are lowering our guard as respects our spirit. Hence, a key
lesson from the 12 prophets that will contribute to
our enjoying a strong marriage bond is to give attention to ‘our spirit.’
8

No doubt you are determined to keep your mar-

riage intact. Still, you are not immune to problems
in married life. How can you best deal with any that
7. In harmony with admonition found in the book of Malachi, how can you
maintain a strong marriage bond?
8, 9. Why was the episode of Hosea and Gomer included in the Bible?
168

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

arise, especially if you feel that most of the fault
lies with your mate? Remember what was mentioned
earlier in this book, in Chapters 2 and 4, about Hosea. His wife, Gomer, became “a wife of fornication”
and then ‘chased after her passionate lovers.’ Later
she was forsaken, becoming impoverished and enslaved. Hosea took Gomer back at a cost, and he was
urged to love her. Why? To depict graphically what
was taking place between Jehovah and Israel. Jehovah was a “husbandly owner,” and his people were
joined to him as a wife.—Hosea 1:2-9; 2:5-7; 3:1-5;
Jeremiah 3:14; Isaiah 62:4, 5.
9

From early times, the Israelites hurt Jehovah’s

feelings by following after other gods. (Exodus 32:710; Judges 8:33; 10:6; Psalm 78:40, 41; Isaiah 63:10)
The northern ten-tribe kingdom was especially reprehensible for calf worship. (1 Kings 12:28-30) In addition, the Israelites did not rely on their Husbandly Owner, Jehovah, but, rather, looked to political
lovers. At one time, like an obstinate zebra in heat,
they went after Assyria. (Hosea 8:9) How would you
feel if your mate acted that way?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

169

10

By Hosea’s time, over 700 years had passed since

the Israelites had come into a covenant relationship
with Jehovah. Nevertheless, God was willing to forgive them, provided that they returned to him. Hosea is thought to have started prophesying before
803 B.C.E., so Jehovah’s forbearance continued for
some 60 more years for Israel and almost 200 years
for Judah! Using Hosea’s family situation as an illustration, Jehovah was still inviting his covenant
people to repent. He had legitimate reasons to terminate his marriage with Israel, yet he kept sending
prophets to help his ?gurative wife come back, even
at a cost to himself.—Hosea 14:1, 2; Amos 2:11.
11

If you faced a marital situation in which your

mate appeared to be in the wrong, would you react
as Jehovah did? Would you initiate e?orts to restore
your marriage to its former condition? (Colossians
3:12, 13) Doing so requires humility. What a wonderful example Jehovah set in his dealings with the Israelites! (Psalm 18:35; 113:5-8) God ‘spoke to the Israelites’ heart,’ even pleading with them. As imperfect
10, 11. How can you imitate Jehovah if you faced a marital situation in
which your mate appeared to be in the wrong?
170

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

humans, do we not have greater reason to speak
to our mate’s heart, striving to resolve problems
and overlook mistakes? Signi?cantly, Jehovah’s efforts brought some results. A remnant of the nation
opened their heart while in the wilderness of their
exile in Babylon, and they later returned to their
homeland, calling Jehovah “My husband.”—Hosea 2:
14-16.1
12

In the event that a serious problem arises, your

genuine e?orts to restore your relationship with your
mate may well bear ?ne fruit. God was willing to
forgive even the gross sin of spiritual fornication on
the part of his ?gurative mate. Most marital problems among true Christians have not reached such
a crisis. Many problems start with harsh or hurtful words. So if your mate’s stabbing words have
caused hurt feelings, consider what Hosea, and Jehovah himself, went through. (Proverbs 12:18) Might
that not help you to forgive?
1 In a case where a Christian’s mate is guilty of adultery, the innocent
partner has to decide whether to forgive or not.—Matthew 19:9.

12. In what way can your meditating on Jehovah’s handling of his ?gurative wife bene?t your marriage?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

171

BY WAY OF REVIEW
? In building up your family, what lessons
can you learn from Malachi 2:16?
? How did Jehovah handle the situation
when his ?gurative wife betrayed him?
—Hosea 3:1-5.
? What can one do to restore a marital relationship after a serious error?
—Hosea 2:2.
13

There is yet another aspect of this historical ac-

count. Was God willing to restore his relationship
with his people while they kept committing fornication? God told Hosea about the adulterous nation:
“She should put away her fornication from before
herself and her acts of adultery from between her
breasts.” (Hosea 2:2) The people needed to repent
and “produce fruit that be?ts repentance.” (Matthew
3:8) In this regard, focus on your own shortcomings
rather than those of your mate. If you have wronged
your mate, why not seek to restore the relationship
13. What lesson can we learn from the fact that Jehovah required repentance on the part of his wayward people?
172

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

by sincerely apologizing and changing your course?
You may be rewarded with forgiveness.

“THE CORDS OF LOVE”
—A BASIS FOR GIVING DIS CIPLINE
14

Regarding family life, we can learn even more

from Jehovah’s dealings with the Israelites as mentioned in the 12 prophets. Those books contain indications as to how to help your children. To say the
least, bringing up children today is not easy. Parents
must take their responsibility seriously. We read:
“ ‘The day that is coming will certainly devour [people],’ Jehovah of armies has said, ‘so that it will not
leave to them either root or bough.’ ” (Malachi 4:1)
In that day of accounting, young children (boughs)
will be dealt with justly according to Jehovah’s assessment of their parents (roots), who are responsible for minor children. (Isaiah 37:31) How parents
are living may decide the future of their young ones,
either for good or for bad. (Hosea 13:16) If you
(the root) are not maintaining a good standing with
14, 15. (a) In view of Malachi 4:1, why should you take seriously the responsibility of teaching your children? (b) How can you help your children
get to know Jehovah?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

173

Jehovah, what may happen to your young ones (the
boughs) on the day of his fury? (Zephaniah 1:14-18;
Ephesians 6:4; Philippians 2:12) Conversely, your
faithful e?orts to have God’s approval can bene?t
your young ones.—1 Corinthians 7:14.
15

After quoting Joel’s prophecy regarding the need

to call on the name of Jehovah, the apostle Paul
wrote: “How will they call on him in whom they have
not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in
him of whom they have not heard?” (Romans 10:1417; Joel 2:32) Paul was speaking about our public
ministry, but you can apply the principle to teaching your children. How can they put faith in Jehovah
without hearing about him? Do you spend enough
time from day to day teaching your children how
good Jehovah is, engendering in them deep love for
him and his guidance? It is likely that young ones
will thrive if they constantly hear about Jehovah in
the family environment.—Deuteronomy 6:7-9.
16

When children are very young, it may be rela-

tively easy to get them to Christian meetings. How16. In line with Micah 6:3-5, how can you imitate Jehovah when disciplining your children?
174

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ever, as they grow older, they begin to have a mind
of their own. How can you deal with your children
if occasionally they show rebellious tendencies? You
can learn from the 12 prophets, noting how Jehovah
dealt with Israel and Judah. (Zechariah 7:11, 12) For
example, as you read Micah 6:3-5, consider its tone.
The Israelites were in the wrong; still God addressed
them as “my people.” He pleaded: “O my people, remember, please.” Instead of harshly accusing them,
he tried to reach their hearts. Can you imitate Jehovah even when disciplining your children? However
in the wrong they may have been, treat them as an
integral part of your family, not addressing them in
demeaning terms. Rather than condemning them,
make tender pleas. Ask questions to draw them out.
Strive to reach their heart so that they open up.
—Proverbs 20:5.
17

Why do you discipline your children? Some par-

ents do it because they do not want the family’s reputation jeopardized. Jehovah showed the motive behind his discipline, declaring: “I taught Ephraim to
17, 18. (a) What should motivate you to discipline your children? (b) How
can you maintain “the cords of love” with your children?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

175

walk, taking them upon my arms . . . With the ropes
of earthling man I kept drawing them, with the cords
of love.” (Hosea 11:3, 4) In this instance, Hosea likens the relationship between Jehovah and Israel to
that of a father and a son. Can you picture a loving
parent, leading the child with cords in hand, trying
to help a wobbly infant to walk? The cords are a
support if the baby stumbles, a guide when he wanders.—Jeremiah 31:1-3.
18

Will you imitate God’s love for the Israelites?

Again and again they turned their back on him, but
he did not quickly let go of those cords of love.
Young ones may seem inclined to stray at times and
to stumble over little things, but try to maintain the
ties of love between you and them. Bear in mind
that Jehovah was not blinded by favoritism to overlook the wrongdoing of his people. He faced the situation squarely, lovingly disciplined them, and took
the time to make needed help available. If you note
that your son or daughter seems to be drifting from
the way of the truth, do not ignore that. Try to lead
him or her back, as if with guiding cords, providing
176

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

warm help during this problematic period. Spend
time with your troubled children. This cannot be
overemphasized—spend time with them!
19

Hosea foresaw that a remnant of Israelites would

accept discipline: “The sons of Israel will come back
and certainly look for Jehovah their God, and for
David their king; and they will certainly come quivering to Jehovah and to his goodness in the ?nal
part of the days.” (Hosea 3:5) Yes, God’s disciplinary action worked with a remnant of his people. Be
optimistic that this will be so with your children.
Try to see the good in them. Be kind when you talk
to them yet ?rm in holding to Bible principles. Even
if a wayward child does not respond favorably now,
who knows when he may come to his senses?

BEWARE OF BAD AS S O CIATIONS!
20

What can you young one s learn from the

12 prophets? One of the most-quoted scriptures in
discussions between you and your parents may be
1 Corinthians 15:33 about avoiding bad associations.
19. Why should you not give up on your children?
20. What question regarding associations can young ones ?nd answered in
the books of the 12 prophets?
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

177

‘But is being friends with those who do not worship
Jehovah really that bad?’ some of you might wonder. Well, you can ?nd the answer to that question
in these 12 books.
21

While the books of the 12 prophets were direct-

ed mainly toward God’s people, the book of Obadiah addressed the Edomites, who had been referred
to as the Israelites’ brothers.1 (Deuteronomy 2:4)
Unlike most of the other books of the 12 prophets,
Obadiah uses the pronoun you in reference to the
Edomites. Now think about the Edomites. The time
is about 607 B.C.E. when Jerusalem is being besieged. Although the Edomites are blood relatives of
Jacob, they team up with the Babylonians! “Lay it
bare! Lay it bare!” the Edomites jeer. (Psalm 137:7;
Obadiah 10, 12) They plan to take over the land of
Judah. They even eat food with the Babylonians,
which in the Orient can indicate that the two parties are in a covenant relationship.
1 The other exception is the book of Nahum, directed to the Ninevites.

21-23. (a) What can young people learn from the course the Edomites
took? (b) Who really are your friends?
178

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

22

Notice what Obadiah foretells about the Edom-

ites: “The very men [the Babylonians] in covenant
with you have all deceived you. The men at peace
with you have prevailed against you. Those eating food with you will place a net under you as
one in whom there is no discernment.” (Obadiah 7)
What actually happened to the Edomites, who deserted their brother, Jacob, and chose as companions
the Babylonians? Eventually, the Babylonians under
Nabonidus destroyed the Edomites. By Malachi’s
day, God had made the mountains of Edom a desolated waste and Edom’s inheritance for the jackals.
—Malachi 1:3.
23

Now think about your so-called friends who do

not worship Jehovah. Have you not observed that
‘the very boys [or girls] in covenant,’ or bonds of
friendship, often deceive one another and “place
a net under” their so-called friends? If the deception comes to light, what do they say? They might
consider the friends they deceived to be naive, not
discerning enough to see through another’s wiles.
How like the Babylonians with their companions, the
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

179

Edomites! Do you feel that such “friends” would
really care about you when you faced problems?
(Obadiah 13-16) On the other hand, think of Jehovah God and his people today. Jehovah is always
there to help you. He will sustain you through dif?cult periods. His people too prove to be ‘true companions loving all the time,’ like faithful ones “born
for when there is distress.”—Proverbs 17:17.

VALUE THE MO ST IMP ORTANT B OND OF ALL
24

Ye s, family tie s are imp ortant and worth

strengthening. We can draw numerous lessons about
them from the 12 prophets. You may want to go
through those books and apply the method we have
used here. This will enable you to draw from them
even more lessons about improving your family life.
Still, is having a happy family life the matter of foremost importance for God’s worshippers today?
25

Interestingly, with regard to the coming of Jeho-

vah’s day, Joel prophesied: “Gather the people together. Sanctify a congregation. . . . Let the bride24, 25. What must be foremost in our life?
180

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HOW CAN YOU BENEFIT?
? How can you bene?t from the following
scriptures?
Hosea 11:3, 4;
Micah 6:3-5;

Obadiah 7;
Malachi 4:1

? As illustrated in this chapter, how can you
use the following texts to improve your family life?
Hosea 14:4;
Malachi 2:11, 12

Joel 1:3;

groom go forth from his interior room, and the bride
from her nuptial chamber.” (Joel 2:15, 16) Everyone
in the household was to be gathered together for
the worship of Jehovah. Even the newlyweds, who
are naturally distracted, were no exception! Nothing
should come ahead of our gathering to God. With
the day of Jehovah fast approaching, having a good
standing with him must be foremost in our life. In
the ?nal section of this book, we will consider what
we should joyfully be doing today.
Contribute to Family Life That Pleases God

181

S E C T I O N

4

AWAIT J EHOVAH’S DAY
W ITH J OY
Jehovah used his prophets to warn about what is
ahead—the outpouring of his anger. But we should not
think of him as an angry God. He is “joyful over [his
people] with happy cries.” While keeping in expectation
of his great day, we have every reason to “rejoice and exult with all the heart.” (Zephaniah 3:14, 17) How can
you manifest this in your actions and attitude? And why
can you be thankful for what you consider from the
12 prophetic books?

CHAPTER ELEVEN

J EHOVAH WANTS P EOPLE TO
GAIN L IFE—D O YOU?
JEHOVAH was glad. The prophet was gloomy. God
had mercifully spared the lives of thousands of people. Jonah would have let them perish! Jehovah
chose to forgive and preserve those who had been
his people’s enemies.
2

As we can see from Jonah’s case, at times it may

be hard for humans to grasp the scope of God’s
forbearance and to re?ect His desire that people
gain life. Jonah found Jehovah’s decision to spare
the Ninevites “highly displeasing, and he got to
be hot with anger.” Is it possible that Jonah was
more concerned with his own feelings than with
mercy and the saving of lives? He may have imagined that if the Ninevites were spared, he would
lose face. (Jonah 4:1, 10, 11) What about our time,
1, 2. (a) What can we learn from Jonah’s reaction to Jehovah’s decision
about Nineveh? (b) Why should we examine God’s mercy and his view of
life?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

183

as Jehovah’s day of judgment fast approaches? You
might ask: ‘How can I deepen my appreciation for
God’s forgiveness, and how can I help repentant
wrongdoers to bene?t more fully from his tenderness? Yes, how can I imitate God’s desire that people gain life?’

JUSTICE AND MERCY WITH LIFE IN VIEW
3

Some people feel that these 12 prophetic books,

page after page, talk about God’s wrath and his punishing of people, his executing of justice. They might
ask: ‘Where is Jehovah’s mercy? Does he care about
saving lives?’ In reality, rather than contradicting
each other, God’s justice and his mercy work together and contribute to the saving of lives. Justice and
mercy are two facets of his perfectly balanced personality. (Psalm 103:6; 112:4; 116:5) By undoing the
wrongs of the wicked, God is showing mercy toward
the rightly disposed. That evidences his perfect justice. On the other hand, being fully just, Jehovah in
his mercy allows for the limitations of imperfect hu3. Is there a contradiction between God’s justice and his mercy? Explain.
184

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

mans. You might put it this way: judgment where
needed, mercy wherever possible. In the prophets’
messages, you can ?nd many statements that bear
out this perfect balance, showing that God wants
people to gain life. Let us examine this and in the
process ?nd lessons that we can apply in practical
ways today.
4

The prophet Joel conveyed a message of denunci-

ation, yet he also con?rmed that God “is gracious
and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in lovingkindness.” (Joel 2:13) About a hundred years later, in
the eighth century B.C.E., Micah stressed how much
we need Jehovah’s forgiveness. After asking “Who is
a God like you?” Micah described Jehovah this way:
“He will certainly not hold onto his anger forever,
for he is delighting in loving-kindness. He will again
show us mercy.” (Micah 7:18, 19) As we can see from
Jonah’s account of the Ninevites, God is willing to
reconsider bringing punishment on objects of his
wrath if they back up their remorse with works be?tting repentance.
4. What evidence is there that God wants people to gain life?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

185

5

We are not living in the time of the 12 proph-

ets. Yet, are we not touched by such indications of
Jehovah’s mercy and his interest in saving lives?
Your feeling that way can strengthen your attachment to God and increase your interest in helping
others to gain life. Though most people today pursue a bad course, we are assured that God “does
not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Peter 3:9) Such a desire on
Jehovah’s part is illustrated in the warm expressions uttered by Hosea upon receiving his adulterous wife back. Jehovah ‘spoke to the heart’ of his
people. God was not obligated to show forgiveness,
but he was willing to do so of his “own free will.”
(Hosea 1:2; 2:13, 14; 3:1-5; 14:4) Do you know why
God’s attitude and actions in this regard are so important? Because lives are involved. You can see
further evidence of God’s mercy and of his desire
that people gain life when you look at the Christian congregation, which is doing something that
you are involved in.
5. What aspects of God’s mercy and his interest in saving lives do you ?nd
most heartwarming? (See also “They Made Themselves Available.”)
186

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HELPING PEOPLE GAIN LIFE
6

Why do you share in the public ministry? One

main reason is so that you can help others come to
know the true God. Here is something important to
know about Jehovah: He provides clear warnings
6. In what key way does God show that he desires that people gain life?

THEY MADE THEMSELVES AVAILABLE

The 12 prophets were exceptional examples
of individuals concerned about people’s lives.
They loyally carried their messages for the bene?t of God’s people and others, despite the
sacri?ces involved, the dangers encountered,
and the threats received. In the ever-expanding
earthly part of God’s organization, there is an
ongoing need for mature men who are willing
to serve as elders and ministerial servants in
the congregations worldwide. There is also an
urgent need for more full-time ministers. Can
you imitate the example of the prophets by offering yourself willingly, using your skills and
abilities to do God’s work both inside and outside the congregation? That is one of the ?nest
ways to imitate Jehovah so that others can gain
life.
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

187

before in?icting punishment. This shows his merciful interest in people, interest that they not die but,
rather, gain life. The 12 prophets let wrongdoers
know that God was o?ering them the opportunity to
mend their ways and to escape his righteous anger.
We are involved in a similar work today. As a Christian, you have the privilege of proclaiming the warning of God’s coming day of vengeance. While you do
that, avoid any feelings of vindictiveness, wanting to
see unreceptive people “get what is coming to them.”
Remind yourself that to a large extent, you are
preaching so that some can get on the road to life.
—Joel 3:9-12; Zephaniah 2:3; Matthew 7:13, 14.
7

Every time you share Bible truths on the door-

step, at school, at your workplace, or elsewhere, you
are o?ering help to a person who urgently needs
God’s mercy and forgiveness. (Hosea 11:3, 4) Granted, you may face apathy and indi?erence. Yet, by
persevering despite that, you imitate our merciful
God, who through Zechariah said to His wayward
people: “Return, please, from your bad ways and
7. (a) Why is sharing in the witnessing work vital? (b) If we face apathy,
how can thinking about Jehovah’s attitude help us?
188

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

from your bad dealings.” (Zechariah 1:4) Who knows
how many people might respond as you tell them
about God’s mercy and point the way to life? Again,
try to keep in mind that you are preaching because
Jehovah wants people to gain life, and you do too.
8

You may ?nd it heartening to call to mind this

fact: There have almost always been people who respond to God’s messages. Thus, Hosea could speak
of those who realized that “the ways of Jehovah are
upright.” The prophet added: “The righteous are the
ones who will walk in them.” (Hosea 14:9) Down
through the centuries, many have been touched by
God’s invitation: “Come back to me with all your
hearts.” (Joel 2:12) That was said to a people who
had known Jehovah, but it also re?ects God’s interest in those who are just learning about him. Yes,
God has not lost con?dence in humans’ ability to
feel sorry for their past wrong course, to repent, and
to turn to doing what is right. That puts them in line
for survival.—1 Timothy 4:16.
9

There is another element in Jehovah’s forgiving

8. Why is it heartening to recall how some have responded to God’s mercy?
9. The response of the Ninevites shows that what is necessary?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

189

the Ninevites. We read that the people took the message of imminent divine judgment seriously, and
they “began to put faith in God.” (Jonah 3:5) Faith,
not merely fear of judgment, was necessary in order
to keep living. Because of Jehovah’s keen desire to
see people repent and act in faith, he has allowed us
to be preachers helping people to make a choice.
With what result? We read in connection with the
Ninevites: “The true God got to see their works, that
they had turned back from their bad way; and so the
true God felt regret over the calamity that he had
spoken of causing to them; and he did not cause it.”
(Jonah 3:10) Jehovah cannot be deluded by mere
words or token gestures. The Ninevites must have
been genuine in their expression of remorse displayed by their works. God could see that they made
a real change; they showed genuine repentance combined with faith.
10

Never should we conclude that Jehovah’s inter-

est in saving lives bene?ted only the Ninevites. At
Jerusalem’s destruction in 607 B.C.E.—after the ministry of Obadiah, Nahum, and Habakkuk—Jehovah
10. What were some situations in which Jehovah o?ered salvation?
190

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

provided escape for obedient Jeremiah and a group
of his faithful companions. (Jeremiah 39:16-18) And
God’s prophets predicted that a repentant remnant would return from Babylon and restore pure
worship. (Micah 7:8-10; Zephaniah 3:10-20) Those
prophecies have had a grand ful?llment in modern
times. After World War I, anointed Christians, many
of whom had become lax as to true worship, were restored to zealous activity and to Jehovah’s favor,
with life in view. Today, too, people from “many nations” are becoming “joined to Jehovah.” (Zechariah
2:11) These have the prospect of surviving the approaching end of this system of things. Hence, your
public ministry is not a mere act of obedience that
you do because Christians were so commanded. Nor
is it something done just to ful?ll prophecy. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) The focus of your public ministry is helping people to learn about Jehovah, to exercise faith, and to gain life.

LIFE FOR THO SE RETURNING TO JEHOVAH
11

Jehovah is interested in new ones and wants

11, 12. How can God’s mercy bene?t those who were once his worshippers?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

191

them to gain life, yet he does not forget those who
have already been serving him. We too should be interested in such ones and want them to continue in
the way of life. In practical ways, how can we manifest our interest?
12

You may know of some who learned about Jeho-

vah, exercised faith in him, and became active in
true worship but are not presently serving him. The
messages Jehovah sent through the 12 prophets show
that he was willing to extend mercy to those who
were once among his people but who did not persist
in true worship. The same is true today, whether
such ones have drifted away, have been drawn away,
or have fallen away into wrongdoing and need to repent. (Hebrews 2:1; 3:12) Though they may not be
happy while away from Jehovah, they may ?nd it dif?cult to return. God appeals to them, as in the words
of his prophet: “This is what Jehovah of armies has
said: ‘Return to me,’ is the utterance of Jehovah of
armies, ‘and I shall return to you.’ ” (Zechariah 1:3)
How reassuring are Hosea’s words! He says: “Do
come back, O Israel, to Jehovah your God, for you
192

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HAVE YOU DISCERNED?
? Why can you bene?t by examining your
own attitude toward mercy and compassion?
—Jonah 4:1, 10, 11.
? How do Jehovah’s mercy and justice work together?—Hosea 2:19; Micah 7:9.
? What aspects of Jehovah’s forgiveness are exempli?ed by the case of the Ninevites?
—Jonah 3:5, 9, 10; 4:2.
have stumbled in your error. Take with yourselves
words and come back to Jehovah. Say to him, all you
people, ‘May you pardon error; and accept what is
good.’ ” Yes, even those who committed gross sins
but who then returned to God in true repentance
could experience forgiveness leading to full recovery.
(Hosea 6:1; 14:1, 2; Psalm 103:8-10) That was so in
the prophets’ days, and it is true in our day.
13

What, though, does that mean for Christians

who have remained on the road to life? How can we
show that we have Jehovah’s view of others? Jehovah
13. What reasons do we have to show mercy toward those whom God has
forgiven?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

193

expects us to show mercy, both to new ones and to
those who may have lapsed in their service to him.
God stated through Hosea what He wants from us:
“In loving-kindness I have taken delight, and not in
sacri?ce.” Jesus Christ drew on those words and expressed the thought this way: “Go, then, and learn
what this means, ‘I want mercy, and not sacri?ce.’ ”
(Hosea 6:6; Matthew 9:13) Our demonstrating such
mercy is critical to maintaining our own relationship
with God. Note how the apostle Paul linked being
forgiving with imitating God: “Become kind to one
another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one
another just as God also by Christ freely forgave
you. Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved
children, and go on walking in love.” (Ephesians
4:32–5:2) How are you doing as to imitating God in
this respect?
14

What if a brother who sinned gravely was un-

repentant and had to be expelled from the congregation? Such a thing occurred back in the ?rst centu14, 15. Under what type of circumstances may our attitude toward Jehovah’s forgiveness be tested?
194

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

ry; Christians who became unrepentant sinners had
to be disfellowshipped. If that happened while Jesus’
apostles were still present, it is not surprising that it
occasionally happens today. In such cases, loyal ones
in the congregation accept the Bible’s direction not
to associate with someone who has been expelled.
Their loyalty to Jehovah may help the wrongdoer to
see the seriousness of his wrong course, and he may
be moved to repent. We read in the Bible that a man
in Corinth who was expelled did later repent and
turn around, and he was reinstated. (1 Corinthians 5:
11-13; 2 Corinthians 2:5-8) When that happens today,
how do you feel, and how can you show your interest in others’ gaining life?
15

A repentant wrongdoer may be ashamed and in

despair, needing reassurance that both God and his
brothers love him and want him to gain life. See how
tenderly God reassured his ancient people who were
willing to repent: “I will engage you to me in faithfulness; and you will certainly know Jehovah.” (Hosea 2:20) Since that is how God feels, we should display that we are in harmony with the one whom
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

195

Zechariah described as the God who ‘shows mercy.’
—Zechariah 10:6.
16

God wants people to gain life, so he is glad when

a sinner repents or a formerly inactive servant renews his zeal.1 (Luke 5:32) In the case of the reinstated Corinthian man mentioned earlier, Paul exhorted the congregation to forgive and encourage
him, letting him know that they really loved him:
“This rebuke given by the majority is su?cient for
such a man, so that . . . you should kindly forgive
and comfort him, that somehow such a man may not
be swallowed up by his being overly sad. Therefore
I exhort you to con?rm your love for him.” (2 Corinthians 2:6-8) Remember that Hosea quoted Jehovah as saying regarding former sinners: “I shall heal
their unfaithfulness. I shall love them of my own
free will.” (Hosea 14:4) Will we imitate Jehovah, being happy to contribute to such healing and the everlasting life to which it can lead?
1 Three heartwarming illustrations show God’s intense concern for
those of his people who have strayed—the illustrations of the lost sheep,
the lost coin, and the prodigal son.—Luke 15:2-32.

16. How should we react when someone is reinstated?
196

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

17

Jehovah makes it clear that he treats with digni-

ty those who do return, accepting them back as full
recipients of his love, just as Hosea readily received
back his formerly unfaithful wife. Jehovah tells of
the way he treated his servants: “I became to them
as those lifting o? a yoke on their jaws, and gently I
brought food to each one.” (Hosea 11:4) How heartwarming is the a?ection by which Jehovah gently
draws such returnees! We can imitate him by our not
being rigid or cool toward one who manifested godly sadness and genuine repentance. Once he has been
accepted back into the congregation, rather than displaying resentment or holding any grudge against
him over his past errors, we should speak consolingly to him as needed.—1 Thessalonians 5:14.
18

Can you think of other ways to imitate Jehovah

in connection with a disfellowshipping from the congregation? If someone had to be expelled, can we be
of help to loyal ones in his family, perhaps a faithful mate and the children? They may be struggling to
keep up their meeting attendance and ministry. Will
17, 18. How can we lovingly assist those who have returned to Jehovah or
family members of one who has been disfellowshipped?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

197

we give them the special support that they may
need? Another way to show tender mercy is to use
“good words, comforting words,” opening up encouraging conversation with such faithful ones. (Zechariah 1:13) There are many opportunities for that
before and after meetings, while together in the ministry, or at other times. They are fellow workers, dear
members of our congregation who should not feel
shunned or isolated. In some cases, just the children
of a disfellowshipped parent are striving to serve
Jehovah. We truly want them to gain life. How can
we show that?

“A FATHERLES S B OY IS SHOWN MERCY”
19

You can ?nd a pattern of providing help in

the ministry of Zephaniah, who served in the midseventh century B.C.E. He may have been of the royal family of Judah, possibly a distant cousin of
King Josiah. The king’s father had been assassinated,
forcing eight-year-old Josiah to the throne. He faced
a challenging task: The nation was mired in idolatry
19. Zephaniah provided what spiritual assistance to one who might be compared to “a fatherless boy”?
198

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

and detestable practices. (Zephaniah 3:1-7) Young,
fatherless Josiah needed skillful guidance and sound
advice to rule that wayward nation. Jehovah provided wise direction through Zephaniah and other
prophets, as was mentioned in earlier chapters of
this book. Signi?cantly, while Jehovah through his
prophet spoke against “the princes” of Judah, He did
not criticize the king himself. (Zephaniah 1:8; 3:3)
This may indicate that young King Josiah had already shown himself to be inclined toward pure worship. The prophet’s admonition undoubtedly helped
Josiah to galvanize his determination to purge Judah
of unclean worship.
20

Zephaniah’s interest in Josiah illustrates for us

Jehovah’s interest in needy, vulnerable young ones,
such as children whose parent may have been disfellowshipped. Hosea declared: “By [God] a fatherless
boy is shown mercy.” (Hosea 14:3) Do you know
of any other “fatherless” boys and girls in need
of spiritual and practical mentoring? They might
20. How can spiritual mentoring help “fatherless” ones in the congregation?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

199

HOW CAN YOU BENEFIT?
? How can those who have seriously sinned
bene?t from God’s mercy?—Hosea 3:3;
4:2; 14:4.
? What are some speci?c ways in which
you can show loving-kindness within the
congregation?—Hosea 11:4; Zechariah 1:13.
? Why is compassion vital in assisting those
in need?—Zephaniah 3:16, 17.
be spiritual orphans, children of single-parent families, or young ones who serve Jehovah without the
support of their family. Quite often, the extent to
which such ones stay close to the congregation and
go on to mature spiritually is a?ected by the presence or absence of a spiritual mentor. Many “a fatherless boy” has blossomed into a balanced, spiritual adult after being shown loving interest by mature
Christians in the congregation.—Psalm 82:3.
21

A single mother, for example, may be helped

if mature Christians show interest in her children.
(James 1:27) While showing due respect for headship
21. Mature Christians can o?er what assistance to young ones?
200

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

and consideration for propriety, overseers and others
can o?er spiritual support to members of disadvantaged families. Perhaps you and your mate or family
can spend time with a fatherless boy or girl. Can you
act in a considerate way toward young ones who
might be plagued by loneliness? They may need empathy and con?dential talk, which you could give ear
to while sharing with them in the public ministry.
You are no doubt busy, so your rendering such help
to a young one with regularity over a period of time
can be “a test of the genuineness of your love.”
(2 Corinthians 8:8) Your e?orts will re?ect your
interest in others’ gaining life.
22

How reassuring it is to re?ect on God’s interest

in people, his wanting them to gain life everlasting!
He would rather display his a?ection for righteous
people who love him and grant them life than express his displeasure toward those who choose to be
irreformable and unworthy of everlasting life. As we
eagerly await the day of Jehovah, let us imitate him
in helping others get on the way to life.
22. How do you feel about Jehovah’s interest in others’ gaining life?
Jehovah Wants People to Gain Life—Do You?

201

CHAPTER TWELVE

“K EEP IN E XPECTATION OF I T ”
HOW long have you been waiting for Jehovah’s day to
rid the earth of wickedness? How long are you willing to
wait for it? Meanwhile, what attitude and resulting actions will mark your life? Clearly, your answers will differ from those of churchgoers who are living just as they
please, waiting to go to heaven.
2

While you are awaiting that great day, the books that

the 12 prophets wrote can be of signi?cant help. Many
of those prophets lived when a judicial intervention
from God was impending. For instance, Micah served
when the punishment of Samaria at the hands of the Assyrians in 740 B.C.E. was approaching. (See the time line
on pages 26 and 27.) Later in the stream of time, but just
as certain, was the day of Jehovah against Judah. Since
Micah did not know exactly when God would act, did
he conclude that he should just sit and do little, hoping
that God would act soon? Here are Micah’s words: “As
1, 2. (a) What questions might you ask yourself? (b) In what situation
did some of the 12 prophets live, and what attitude did Micah have?
202

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

for me, it is for Jehovah that I shall keep on the lookout.
I will show a waiting attitude for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.” (Micah 7:7) Yes, con?dent
of what was coming, Micah was like an active sentry on
a watchtower.—2 Samuel 18:24-27; Micah 1:3, 4.
3

Next, locate Zephaniah and Habakkuk on the time

line. Note that these two served in a period closer to the
destruction of Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E. Still, they could
not know whether God’s execution of judgment was
right at hand or decades away. (Habakkuk 1:2; Zephaniah 1:7, 14-18) Zephaniah wrote: “ ‘Keep yourselves in expectation of me,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘till the
day of my rising up to the booty, for my judicial decision is . . . to pour out upon them my denunciation, all
my burning anger.’ ” (Zephaniah 3:8) And what about
Habakkuk, who lived soon after Zephaniah? Habakkuk
wrote: “The vision is yet for the appointed time, and it
keeps panting on to the end, and it will not tell a lie.
Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it; for it
will without fail come true. It will not be late.”—Habakkuk 2:3.
3. With the destruction of Jerusalem ahead of them, Habakkuk and Zephaniah manifested what outlook?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

203

4

The contexts of the pronouncements at Zephani-

ah 3:8 and Habakkuk 2:3 are revealing. At a time
when certain Jews were saying, “Jehovah will not
do good, and he will not do bad,” Zephaniah proclaimed “the day of Jehovah’s anger.” On that day
both enemy nations and wayward Jews would feel
God’s displeasure. (Zephaniah 1:4, 12; 2:2, 4, 13;
3:3, 4) Do you imagine that Zephaniah was fearful of God’s denunciation and anger? On the contrary, he was to keep himself “in expectation.” ‘What
of Habakkuk?’ you might wonder. He also was to
“keep in expectation of it.” You are right to conclude that Zephaniah and Habakkuk were not casual
about what lay ahead, carrying on as if they thought
things would never change. (Habakkuk 3:16; 2 Peter 3:4) As noted, though, a signi?cant point that
these two prophets had in common was that both
were to “keep in expectation.” And you know this:
What those two prophets expected became historical
fact in 607 B.C.E. So their keeping “in expectation”
proved to be the course of wisdom.
4. In what contexts did Zephaniah and Habakkuk prophesy, and with what
attitude?
204

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

5

You can be equally sure that “the day of Jehovah’s

anger” against the present system of things will come; it
will be a fact, actual and trustworthy. Surely you have
no doubt about that. Like Zephaniah and Habakkuk,
you do not know exactly when that day will come. (Mark
13:32) Yet, come it will, and ful?llment of Bible prophecy in your time strongly indicates that it will come
soon. Thus, what Jehovah stressed to those prophets applies to you—“Keep in expectation of it.” And remember this absolute truth: Ours is the only God who “acts
for the one that keeps in expectation of him.”—Isaiah
64:4.
6

You can show the proper attitude of expectation,

demonstrating by what you do that you are con?dent
that “the day of Jehovah’s anger” will come exactly
on time. Your being convinced of that and matching
your conviction with ?tting actions are in harmony
with something Jesus said. He urged the apostles and
all anointed Christians: “Let your loins be girded and
your lamps be burning, and you yourselves be like men
5, 6. Given where we are in the outworking of God’s purpose, what attitude should we have?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

205

waiting for their master . . . Happy are those slaves
whom the master on arriving ?nds watching! Truly I say
to you, He will gird himself and make them recline at the
table and will come alongside and minister to them.”
(Luke 12:35-37) Yes, a proper waiting attitude shows
con?dence that Jehovah’s great day will come not a moment later than he has purposed.

“IN EXPECTATION” AND “READY”
7

God’s modern-day servants were in expectation be-

fore God’s Kingdom was established in heaven in 1914
and have been since then. Their expectation has definitely not meant idleness. On the contrary, they have
kept active in their God-assigned witnessing work. (Acts
1:8) Re?ect on this, though: If the great day of Jehovah
had occurred back in 1914, what would your situation
have been? Even if it had occurred 40 years ago, were
you then a person of “holy acts of conduct and deeds of
godly devotion”? (2 Peter 3:11) And what of your family members who are Witnesses or your very close friends
in the congregation? Clearly, this period of expectation
7, 8. (a) What has been the result of God’s patience? (b) Peter urges us
to manifest what attitude?
206

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

has opened to you and many like you the way of salvation, as 2 Peter 3:9 shows. The fact that Jehovah did not
destroy the entire wicked system immediately after the
Kingdom was established has permitted many to repent, even as the Ninevites were able to repent and be
spared. We all have reason to echo the apostle Peter’s
words: “Consider the patience of our Lord as salvation.”
(2 Peter 3:15) And this present period continues to allow individuals to repent or to make adjustments in
their life and thinking.
8

Admittedly, a Christian could think of the situation

that prevailed in the days of Micah, Zephaniah, and Habakkuk with a somewhat detached interest. “After all,”
he might say, “it was such a long time ago!” But what lessons are there for us? We have already mentioned Peter’s counsel about Christians’ needing to be persons of
“holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.”
Right after those words, Peter stressed another need
—our need to be “awaiting and keeping close in mind
the presence of the day of Jehovah.” (2 Peter 3:11, 12)
Hence, we should be “keeping close in mind” that day,
being “in expectation of it.”
“Keep in Expectation of It”

207

9

Whether we have been serving Jehovah for a few

years or for many decades, are we ‘keeping on the lookout and showing the same waiting attitude’ that Micah showed? (Romans 13:11) Granted, as humans, we
might long to know when the end will come and how
much time remains until that event. Yet, we simply cannot know. Recall Jesus’ words: “If the householder had
known in what watch the thief was coming, he would
have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken
into. On this account you too prove yourselves ready,
because at an hour that you do not think to be it, the
Son of man is coming.”—Matthew 24:43, 44.
10

What Jesus said sounds very similar to what Micah,

Zephaniah, and Habakkuk wrote. Yet, Jesus was making
the point, not for people of ancient times, but for his
followers, for us. Many devoted Christians have truly
applied Jesus’ counsel; they have ‘proved themselves
ready,’ remaining in expectation. The apostle John was
a good example of this. He was one of the four on the
Mount of Olives who asked Jesus about the conclusion
of the system of things. (Matthew 24:3; Mark 13:3, 4)
9. Why is ‘keeping on the lookout’ appropriate for us?
10. What lessons do you learn from the apostle John’s life and outlook?
208

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

POINTS FOR REFLECTION
? What central point about your attitude do
you draw from Micah 7:7; Habakkuk 2:3;
and Zephaniah 3:8?
? Why is the counsel found at James 5:10, 11
important for and useful to you?
? How can you bene?t from meditating on
2 Peter 3:9, 11, 12, 14?
That was in the year 33 C.E., but John could not look at
any time line to determine just how soon things would
happen. Now, in your mind, move ahead some 60 years
in time. John had aged, but he did not become weary
and lose his sense of expectation. On the contrary, when
he heard Jesus say: “Yes; I am coming quickly,” John responded: “Amen! Come, Lord Jesus.” John did not regret how he had spent his years. He was convinced that
when Jehovah executes judgment, He would also reward
each one according to his works. (Revelation 22:12, 20)
Whenever that judgment would be, John wanted to be
“ready,” as the Lord Jesus had advised. Do you feel the
same?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

209

“IN EXPECTATION” OR “SATISFIED”?
11

Consider another lesson that we can draw from the

prophets who lived in a period when the executions
of Jehovah’s judgments, ?rst against Israel and then
against Judah, were approaching. While Micah ‘kept
on the lookout and showed a waiting attitude,’ many
around him did not. They became “haters of what is
good and lovers of badness.” Micah warned that if they
would not change, they could ‘call to Jehovah for aid,
but he would not answer them.’ (Micah 3:2, 4; 7:7) Micah’s contemporary Hosea used farming vocabulary
when urging those in the northern kingdom of Israel:
“Sow seed for yourselves in righteousness; reap in accord with loving-kindness. Till for yourselves arable
land, when there is time for searching for Jehovah.” Despite that, most would not listen. They “plowed wickedness,” so unrighteousness is what they reaped. (Hosea
10:12, 13) They condoned or shared in corrupt practices,
‘trusting in their own way’ rather than in Jehovah’s way.
Some today might wonder, ‘How could that happen to
true worshippers living right there in the Promised
11. How did people of Micah and Hosea’s day di?er from those men?
210

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Land?’ Hosea showed that their problem centered on an
attitude like the attitude that we need to guard against
if we are to keep in expectation of Jehovah’s great day.
That is, of becoming settled and “satis?ed.”
12

After God’s people entered the Promised Land, a

land ?owing with milk and honey, they enjoyed considerable prosperity. How did they react? Hosea conveyed
Jehovah’s words: “According to their pasturage they
also came to be satis?ed. They became satis?ed and
their heart began to be exalted. That is why they forgot
me.” (Hosea 13:6) Centuries earlier, God had warned his
people of that very danger. (Deuteronomy 8:11-14; 32:
15) Nonetheless, by the days of Hosea and Amos, the
Israelites succumbed—“they became satis?ed.” Amos
gives us speci?c details. He notes that many had luxurious furnishings in their houses, and some families
even had second homes. They had the best of foods,
drank ?ne wine from select vessels, and applied “the
choicest oils” to their skin, perhaps as scented cosmetics. (Amos 3:12, 15; 6:4-6) You likely recognize that none
12. (a) Hosea identi?ed what undesirable development among the Israelites prior to 740 B.C.E.? (b) The people’s becoming “satis?ed” was
manifested in what ways?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

211

of those aspects of life were improper in themselves, but
giving them too much importance was clearly wrong.
13

Granted, not all in the northern kingdom became

prosperous and “satis?ed.” Some were poor and had to
struggle to make a living and feed their family. (Amos
2:6; 4:1; 8:4-6) The same is true today in many parts of
the earth. Did God’s counsel found at Hosea 13:6 apply
to even the poor in ancient Israel, and does it apply today? Yes, indeed. Jehovah was showing that whether a
true worshipper is prosperous or not, he needs to guard
against becoming so focused on the material aspects of
life that he ‘forgets God.’—Luke 12:22-30.
14

From our vantage point in time and with so much

Bible prophecy now ful?lled, we have added reason to
be alert, ready, in expectation. What, though, if we have
been in expectation for some time, perhaps decades? In
the past we exerted ourselves in the ministry and made
personal decisions that re?ected our conviction that Jehovah’s day was not far o?. But it has not yet come. How
is our sense of expectation holding up? To make it quite
13. What basic defect was found in the Israelites, whether they were prosperous or not?
14. Why is it ?tting for us to re?ect on our sense of expectation?
212

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

personal, ask yourself, ‘Is my sense of expectation still
intense, or has it cooled o? considerably?’—Revelation
2:4.
15

We might gauge our sense of expectation in many

ways, but why not use the very aspects found in Amos’
description of people of his day who “became satis?ed”?
As we examine that, we can analyze whether we detect
in ourselves any tendency toward ‘becoming satis?ed.’
A Christian who in years past re?ected his sense of expectation in his thinking and actions might begin to
strive to have a more luxurious home or automobile, the
very latest style of clothing, expensive cosmetics and
jewelry, or choice wine and rich food. The Bible nowhere suggests that we must be ascetics, deprived of
reasonable pleasure. The man who works hard “should
eat and indeed drink and see good for all his hard
work.” (Ecclesiastes 3:13) However, the danger exists of
a Christian’s focusing ever more on food, drink, and personal appearance. (1 Peter 3:3) Jesus noted that a shift
in focus occurred with some anointed ones in Asia
Minor, proving that this is a danger for Christians.
15. What are some indications that our sense of expectation may have
waned?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

213

(Revelation 3:14-17) Has something similar happened in
our case? Are we ‘becoming satis?ed,’ perhaps preoccupied with material things? Has our sense of expectation
waned?—Romans 8:5-8.
16

A dampening of our expectation of Jehovah’s great

day could reveal itself in the advice we give to our children or to others. A Christian could reason within himself: ‘I chose to forgo educational or career possibilities
because I felt that the end was very close. Now I want
to be sure that my children get the training that will allow them to have a comfortable life.’ Perhaps some in
Hosea’s day had similar thoughts. If so, would their giving parental advice that centered on a “satis?ed” lifestyle have been in their children’s best interests? And if
children back then had in fact pursued a “satis?ed,” or
comfortable, way of life, what would their situation have
been in 740 B.C.E., when Samaria fell to the Assyrians?
—Hosea 13:16; Zephaniah 1:12, 13.

LIVE WITH VALID EXPECTATIONS
17

Like true worshippers of old, we can be con?dent

16. Why would it not be in our children’s best interests to encourage them
to strive for a “satis?ed” way of life?
17. In what way should we imitate Micah?
214

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

that what God promised will be ful?lled on time, at his
appointed time. (Joshua 23:14) The prophet Micah was
wise to show a waiting attitude for the God of his salvation. With our historical perspective, we can look at a
time line of his period and see how near Micah lived to
the time when Samaria was conquered. What about us
and the time in which we live? When we look back on our
life, will it be clear that we made wise choices, such as
those about a secular career, a lifestyle, and the fulltime ministry? Granted, we do not know “that day and
hour.” (Matthew 24:36-42) There is no question, though,
that we are acting wisely if we cultivate an attitude like
that of Micah and act accordingly. And when Micah is
rewarded with life in a restored earthly paradise, how
pleased he will be to know that we have bene?ted from
his prophetic message and faithful example! We will
have become living proof that Jehovah is the God of salvation!
18

Our con?dence has a solid basis. Think, for exam-

ple, about the short prophetic book of Obadiah. It centered on ancient Edom, setting out Jehovah’s judgment
18, 19. (a) To what coming calamity did Obadiah point? (b) How did
Obadiah hold out hope to Israel?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

215

against that people who mistreated their “brother,” Israel. (Obadiah 12) The foretold devastation did take
place, as we discussed in Chapter 10 of this book. The
Babylonians under Nabonidus conquered Edom in the
middle of the sixth century B.C.E., and Edom as a nation ceased to be. There is, though, another important
thought in Obadiah’s message, a thought that bears on
our keeping in expectation of Jehovah’s great day.
19

You know that the enemy nation (Babylon) that

devastated Edom had also carried out God’s punishment of his unfaithful people. In 607 B.C.E., the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem and carried the Jews o?
into exile. The land then became a desolate waste. Did
matters end there? No. Through Obadiah, Jehovah foretold that the Israelites would repossess their land. At
Obadiah 17, you can read this encouraging promise: “In
Mount Zion is where those escaping will prove to be,
and it must become something holy; and the house of
Jacob must take possession of the things for them to
possess.”
20

History con?rms that what Jehovah said through

Obadiah did occur. God foretold it, and it happened.
20, 21. Why should Obadiah 17 be comforting to us?
216

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Thousands of exiles from Judah and Israel returned
in 537 B.C.E. With Jehovah’s blessing, the repatriates
transformed a wasteland into what became a verdant
paradise. You have read at Isaiah 11:6-9 and 35:1-7
prophecies of that marvelous transformation. Of key
importance was that true worship was reestablished,
centered at a rebuilt temple of Jehovah. Thus Obadiah 17 can serve as another proof to us that Jehovah’s
promises are reliable. They are always ful?lled.
21

Obadiah concluded his prophecy with these em-

phatic words: “The kingship must become Jehovah’s.”
(Obadiah 21) Trusting that, you are awaiting the glorious time when Jehovah through Jesus Christ will rule
with no opposition in the entire universe, our planet included. Whether you have been in expectation of Jehovah’s great day—with resulting blessings—for a short
time or for many decades, you can be absolutely sure
that such Bible-based expectations are going to be realized.
22

It is appropriate, then, to repeat Habakkuk’s assur-

ance, which certainly applies in our time: “The vision is
22. Why do you want your outlook to re?ect that of Habakkuk 2:3 and
Micah 4:5?
“Keep in Expectation of It”

217

HOW WILL YOU BENEFIT?
? Whether you are wealthy or poor, what
lessons ought you to draw from Amos 3:15;
5:11; and Haggai 1:4-7?
? What con?ict is there between being
satis?ed and keeping in expectation?
—Habakkuk 3:17, 18.
? Why is it imperative that you maintain
a keen sense of expectation?—Zephaniah
1:12-15.
yet for the appointed time, and it keeps panting on to
the end, and it will not tell a lie. Even if it should delay,
keep in expectation of it; for it will without fail come
true. It will not be late.” (Habakkuk 2:3) Even if from a
human standpoint it might seem that Jehovah’s great
day has delayed, his day will without fail come on schedule. Jehovah promises us that. Thus, those who have
served God for years and those who have taken up his
worship recently can move forward together with con?dence like that expressed at Micah 4:5: “We, for our
part, shall walk in the name of Jehovah our God to time
inde?nite, even forever.”
218

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

“P RO CLAIM T HIS, YOU P EOPLE,
A MONG THE N ATIONS ”
HAVE you ever heard a lion roar? Its roar is said
to be louder than the sound of a jackhammer. What
would you do if you heard a lion roar nearby in the
stillness of the night? Probably react without delay.
Amos, one of the 12 prophets whose writings we are
considering, used this analogy: “There is a lion that
has roared! Who will not be afraid? The Sovereign
Lord Jehovah himself has spoken! Who will not
prophesy?” (Amos 3:3-8) If you heard Jehovah himself speak, would you not react as Amos did? He immediately took action and prophesied against the
ten-tribe nation of Israel.
2

You might say, ‘But I am not a prophet!’ You may

feel rather unquali?ed because you have not received formal training as a prophet. Yet, remember
1. Why can Jehovah’s speaking to his prophet be likened to a lion’s roaring?
2. (a) How can you imitate Amos in fulfilling the commission to prophesy? (b) What are we going to consider in this chapter?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

219

Amos. When confronted by the calf-worshipping
priest Amaziah, Amos said: “I was not a prophet,
neither was I the son of a prophet; but I was a herdsman and a nipper of ?gs of sycamore trees.” (Amos
7:14) Though his background was humble, Amos was
willing to ful?ll his commission as a prophet for Jehovah. How about you? Do you realize that you have
been given an assignment similar in some respects
to that of the 12 prophets? You are to declare God’s
message for today as well as to teach and make disciples. How do you view that serious assignment?
What is the message you are to proclaim among
the nations? How thorough are you in accomplishing that assignment? What determines whether your
work is successful? Let us consider the answers.

‘THE YOUNG BULLS OF YOUR LIPS’
3

Are you really involved in a work like that of the

prophets? You may not have heard the lion roar in
the sense that you have been directly inspired by Jehovah. You have, though, heard from his Word, the
3. How can you be involved in a work similar to that of the prophets whose
writings we are studying?
220

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

Bible, the urgent message about the impending day
of Jehovah. As we noted in Chapter 1 of this book,
the words “prophet” and “prophetic” have a variety
of meanings. Although you may not be a prophet in
the sense that Amos or the other ancient prophets
were, you can still speak out about the future. How?
You can declare the prophetic messages that you
have studied in the pages of the Holy Scriptures, including those of the 12 prophets. Now is the time
for doing just that.
4

Look at the matter from another standpoint. Je-

hovah God told the prophet Joel of a time when people of every sort would prophesy, so to speak: “After that it must occur that I shall pour out my spirit
on every sort of ?esh, and your sons and your daughters will certainly prophesy. As for your old men,
dreams they will dream. As for your young men, visions they will see.” (Joel 2:28-32) On the day of Pentecost 33 C.E., the apostle Peter applied this passage
to the pouring out of holy spirit upon those who
were gathered in an upper chamber in Jerusalem and
4. In what sense is the prophecy at Joel 2:28-32 being ful?lled today?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

221

to their subsequent preaching of “the magni?cent
things of God.” (Acts 1:12-14; 2:1-4, 11, 14-21) Now
consider our time. Joel’s prophecy has been undergoing its major ful?llment since early in the 20th century. Spirit-anointed Christians—male and female,
old and young—began to “prophesy,” that is, to declare “the magni?cent things of God,” including the
good news of the Kingdom, now established in the
heavens.
5

Though not begotten by holy spirit to be sons of

God, “a great crowd” of “other sheep” are telling the
anointed followers of Jesus Christ: “We will go with
you people, for we have heard that God is with you
people.” (Revelation 7:9; John 10:16; Zechariah 8:23)
Whether you have the hope of everlasting life in the
heavens or on the earth, you have the privilege of
o?ering “the young bulls of [your] lips.” (Hosea
14:2) What does that expression in Hosea’s prophecy mean? “Young oxen . . . were the best animals for
thank-o?erings,” says Bible scholar C. F. Keil. The
5. (a) What privilege do we all have? (b) What does o?ering “the young
bulls of [your] lips” mean to you and for you?
222

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

apostle Paul referred to Hosea 14:2, writing: “Let us
always o?er to God a sacri?ce of praise, that is,
the fruit of lips which make public declaration to
his name.” (Hebrews 13:15) Yes, the expression “the
young bulls of our lips” refers to the very best of
our lips, the words we speak in praise of Jehovah.
6

You bring to Jehovah sacri?ces of praise when

you o?er heartfelt prayers to him, make appreciative comments about him at Christian meetings, and
talk to others enthusiastically in the public ministry. Each of us might ask, though, ‘When I participate in such activities, what is the quality of my offering?’ From what you have studied, you have no
doubt come to disdain the priests of Malachi’s day
who blatantly brought defective animals to God’s altar. Jehovah through Malachi had to emphasize to
them the poor quality of their sacri?ces, for they did
not feel that they were despising the table of Jehovah. (Malachi 1:8) Accordingly, we do well to examine the quality of our sacri?ces to ensure that they
are the very best and are not defective in some way.
6. Why should we examine the quality of our sacri?ces of praise?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

223

THE MES SAGE TO BE PRO CLAIMED
7

O?ering “the young bulls of our lips” in the min-

istry demands courage, does it not? That is because
the message we take to people is twofold, and one
of its aspects surely is not a popular one. The prophet Joel told God’s people: “Proclaim this, you people, among the nations, ‘Sanctify war! Arouse the
powerful men! Let them draw near! Let them come
up, all the men of war!’ ” (Joel 3:9) As it applies in
our day, what a challenge that is to the nations! It
is a declaration of Jehovah’s righteous war against
God-defying people. Whereas Jehovah instructs his
people to “beat their swords into plowshares and
their spears into pruning shears,” he tells the enemy
nations to “beat [their] plowshares into swords and
[their] pruning shears into lances.” (Micah 4:3; Joel
3:10) Yes, God’s enemies must prepare themselves to
meet the Creator of the universe in war. That is no
soothing message for us to deliver.
8

In the prophet Micah’s message, those who o?er

‘the young bulls of their lips’ are likened to a lion.
7. Courage is required to proclaim what aspect of our twofold message?
8. Why are “the remaining ones of Jacob” likened to a lion?
224

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

He wrote: “The remaining ones of Jacob must become among the nations . . . like a lion among
the beasts of a forest, like a maned young lion
among droves of sheep, which, when it actually passes through, certainly both tramples down and tears
in pieces; and there is no deliverer.” (Micah 5:8)
Why this analogy? In our day, God’s people, with
the anointed remnant taking the lead, must show
lionlike courage in proclaiming the warning message
to the nations.1
9

Are you courageous like a lion in proclaiming the

warning aspect of the message? You may need such
courage not only when you stand before people in
authority but also when you talk to your peers at
school or at work or to your unbelieving relatives.
(Micah 7:5-7; Matthew 10:17-21) How can you muster up courage in the face of opposition or apathy?
Listen to how Micah was able to accomplish the
1 This prophecy may have had its ?rst ful?llment during the Maccabean period when the Jews under the Maccabees expelled their enemies
from Judah and rededicated the temple. This made it possible for a remnant of the Jews to welcome the Messiah when he appeared.—Daniel 9:
25; Luke 3:15-22.

9. (a) When do you need to exercise lionlike courage? (b) How can you be
courageous in the face of opposition or apathy?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

225

formidable task of warning about the destruction of
both Samaria and Jerusalem: “I myself have become
full of power, with the spirit of Jehovah, and of justice and mightiness, in order to tell to Jacob his revolt and to Israel his sin.” (Micah 1:1, 6; 3:8) You
too can “become full of power” because you too can
receive an abundant supply of God’s empowering
spirit. (Zechariah 4:6) By relying on God in prayer,
you will be able to declare the words that may cause
ears to tingle.—2 Kings 21:10-15.
10

You want to be courageous, but you should also

be tactful in approaching people with the warning
message. We need to be “gentle [or, “tactful”] toward
all,” even when the message is about the impending
“day of Jehovah.” (2 Timothy 2:24; footnote; Joel 2:
1, 11; Zephaniah 1:14) Again, we can learn from the
12 prophets. They boldly declared judgment messages from Jehovah, yet they were considerate of
those who would listen. For example, the prophet
Zephaniah did not mince words when speaking to
10. How can we imitate Zephaniah in proclaiming the message about “the
day of Jehovah”?
226

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

DID YOU GET THE SENSE OF IT?
? How can you o?er ‘the young bulls of your
lips’ today?—2 Kings 20:3; Malachi 1:11.
? What twofold message are you proclaiming?
—Isaiah 61:2; Micah 5:7, 8.
? Why do you need lionlike courage in declaring the day of Jehovah?—Jeremiah 1:19; Joel
3:9-12.
the hardened princes (or, nobles) of his day, but he
did not include faithful King Josiah in that criticism.
(Zephaniah 1:8) When declaring the warning message, can we help people by viewing them as possible sheep, not assuming a negative view of them?
—Matthew 25:32-34.
11

What is the other aspect of the twofold message

that we bear? We ?nd that aspect highlighted in Micah chapter 5. “The remaining ones of Jacob must
become in the midst of many peoples like dew from
Jehovah, like copious showers upon vegetation, that
11. (a) What is the second aspect of the twofold message that we bear?
(b) How can you imitate the 12 prophets when proclaiming the day of Jehovah?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

227

does not hope for man or wait for the sons of earthling man.” (Micah 4:1; 5:7) Because of the good news
that they bring to “many peoples” today, “the remaining ones” of spiritual Jacob, or Israel, and their
companions are like refreshing “dew from Jehovah”
and “copious showers upon vegetation.” We should
be able to learn much from the last 12 books of the
Hebrew Scriptures about this second aspect of our
message, since those prophets proclaimed not only
destruction but also restoration. In your ministry,
are you emphasizing the positive aspect of the message about the day of Jehovah?

HOW D O YOU PRO CLAIM THIS MES SAGE?
12

How, then, are you proclaiming this twofold mes-

sage? The prophet Joel likened the work of God’s
people to a series of plagues by insects, including
locusts. (Joel 1:4) But why do we say that Jehovah’s
people are like, of all things, swarms of insects? Because, as found at Joel 2:11, God identi?es these insects as “his military force.” (God’s people are sym12, 13. (a) What is the signi?cance of God’s people being compared to
swarms of insects? (b) How do you feel about what you read at Joel 2:7, 8?
228

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

bolized by locusts in the book of Revelation as well.
See Revelation 9:3, 4.) The work of the insects that
Joel described was like a devouring ?re, and in their
path what seemed like “the garden of Eden” was
turned into “a desolate wilderness.” (Joel 2:2, 3) How
can you show that you are aware of the signi?cance
of Joel’s prophecy?
13

Think about how thorough these little creatures

are. Joel put it this way: “Like powerful men they
run. Like men of war they go up a wall. And they
go each one in his own ways, and they do not alter
their paths. And one another they do not shove.
As an able-bodied man in his course, they keep
going; and should some fall even among the missiles,
the others do not break o? course.” (Joel 2:7, 8)
No “wall” of opposition would deter them and the
plague they were causing. “Should some fall even
among the missiles,” as has been the case with loyal Christians who have been executed by oppressive
enemies, others take over the work, accomplishing
the mission that Jehovah has for them. Are you
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

229

determined to stick to the assignment of proclaiming the day of Jehovah until God sees that it has
been accomplished? You may even be carrying on
the work in the place of some faithful Christians
who have died.
14

Thoroughness, that is the key. How can you

personally contribute to the thoroughness of the
preaching work as described in Joel’s prophecy?
By participating in the house-to-house ministry and
then returning to teach those who have shown interest. You also call again to contact those who were
not at home. Thus you demonstrate understanding of
this prophetic picture. And when you witness to people on the street, you might meet those whom you
could not otherwise reach. Here is another avenue:
You may be able to help people in your neighborhood who have immigrated from other countries.1
Are you alert to all such opportunities, contributing
to the thoroughness of the preaching work today?
1 The booklet Good News for People of All Nations, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses, has been successfully used in helping people who do
not speak the major language of your area.

14. In what way can you contribute to the thoroughness of the preaching
work?
230

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

WHAT DETERMINES YOUR SUCCES S?
15

How do people respond to the message about

the fear-inspiring day of Jehovah? You should not be
surprised to encounter opposition or apathy. Such
was the case with many of God’s prophets, most of
whom had strong warning messages to convey. (Jeremiah 1:17-19; 7:27; 29:19) Despite that, a number of
prophets saw positive results! At least ?ve of them
—Jonah, Micah, Zephaniah, Haggai, and Zechariah—were able to move the hearts of some people to
repent of their past sins and change their course.
16

Zephaniah’s work as a prophet apparently moved

King Josiah to initiate a revival of pure worship. Micah boldly proclaimed a judgment message against
the head ones of Judah, and King Hezekiah’s actions
harmonized with Micah’s words. (Micah 3:1-3) Interestingly, some older men of Jeremiah’s day referred
to Hezekiah’s response as a good example when they
said that the king ‘feared Jehovah and proceeded to
15. What is noteworthy about people’s response to the messages of the
12 prophets?
16. What fruitage did Micah’s e?orts as a prophet bear?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

231

soften the face of Jehovah.’ (Jeremiah 26:18, 19;
2 Kings 18:1-4) Under Hezekiah’s leadership, the
people of Judah and willing ones from the northern
kingdom celebrated the Passover and the Festival of
Unfermented Cakes, even extending the festival for
an additional week. What was the result of their return to true worship? “There came to be great rejoicing in Jerusalem.” (2 Chronicles 30:23-26) Micah
had started to proclaim God’s message of doom to
the apostate nation under King Ahaz. Yet, the prophet was able to see the ?ne fruitage of his e?orts
when Ahaz’ son Hezekiah responded well.
17

Consider also the prophets Haggai and Zechari-

ah. They served the repatriated Jews, who had become apathetic and self-centered. (Haggai 1:1, 2;
Zechariah 1:1-3) By the time the two prophets took
up their assignments, 16 years had passed since the
foundation of the temple had been laid. People were
“on the run, each one in behalf of his own house”
while Jehovah’s house was “waste.” Haggai called
out to the Jews: “ ‘Be strong, all you people of the
17. What were Haggai and Zechariah able to accomplish?
232

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

land,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘and work.’ ” What
happened then? Jehovah proceeded to “rouse up the
spirit” of Governor Zerubbabel, High Priest Joshua,
and “all the remaining ones of the people.” As a result, they were able to ?nish the work on the temple.—Haggai 1:9, 12, 14; 2:4.
18

Most of the 12 prophets declared messages to

the nation originally dedicated to Jehovah. We may
be preaching to people who have never known the
true God, but we can still learn from the results of
the prophets’ activities. Today, too, in many territories, people are responding to the urgent message
about the day of Jehovah. We are seeing results such
as those foretold by Zechariah: “Many nations will
certainly become joined to Jehovah in that day, and
they will actually become my people; and I will
reside in the midst of you.” (Zechariah 2:11) At
present, in a literal sense, God’s people are ?nding a response among “many nations.” (Revelation
7:9) Zechariah predicted: “Many peoples and mighty
18, 19. (a) How are people in some lands responding to the proclamation
of the day of Jehovah? (b) How will you respond to the need to declare the
warning message to all people?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

233

nations will actually come to seek Jehovah of armies
in Jerusalem and to soften the face of Jehovah.”
They are described as “ten men out of all the languages of the nations” who would take hold of the
skirt of a spiritual Israelite, saying: “We will go with
you people, for we have heard that God is with you
people.”—Zechariah 8:20-23.
19

Note the reference to “all the languages of the

nations.” The Bible and Bible literature are being
translated into many languages, and Jehovah’s Witnesses are training ministers to teach people of “all
the languages of the nations.” (Matthew 28:19, 20;
Acts 1:8) You may have learned another language to
help people in your own area who speak that tongue.
And quite a number have been willing to learn a new
language or two and to move to countries where
many eagerly respond to the good news. Would it be
possible for you to move to such productive territories and thus ‘proclaim this among the nations’?
Consider that prayerfully. If you are raising a family, make the possibility of such a move a subject of
234

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

repeated family discussion, keeping that goal before
your growing children.
20

Another prophet who had a hearing audience, a

very unlikely one at that, was Jonah. The men of
Nineveh, even the king himself, responded favorably
to Jonah’s message, putting faith in Jehovah. God
himself asked: “Ought I not to feel sorry for Nineveh the great city, in which there exist more than one
hundred and twenty thousand men who do not at all
know the di?erence between their right hand and
their left?” (Jonah 4:11) Think about those words in
connection with what moves you to proclaim to others the fear-inspiring day of Jehovah. Do you feel indebted to Jehovah for saving you by means of the
ransom? Do you feel a sense of responsibility as a
dedicated servant of Jehovah? (1 Corinthians 9:16,
17) These are valid reasons for proclaiming the day
of Jehovah. In addition, though, do you “feel sorry”
for the people to whom you proclaim the day of Jehovah? How happy you can be when godlike mercy
moves you to talk to people about that day!
20. What attitude did Jehovah call attention to regarding the people of
Nineveh?
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

235

21

We do not know much about the responses re-

ceived by Joel, Obadiah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and
Malachi. We do know at least one response that
Amos received. Amaziah strongly opposed Amos, accusing the prophet of conspiring against the king
and trying to ban Amos from preaching in Bethel.
(Amos 7:10-13) Amos courageously met the opposition. Today, too, religionists may try to in?uence
some political leaders to persecute Jehovah’s people
or even to ban their bene?cial preaching work. Will
you imitate Amos in boldly proclaiming the good
news despite opposition?
22

Although the 12 prophets experienced varied re-

sponses, all ful?lled their commission. The important thing is, not that people respond to the twofold
message we carry, but that we bring to Jehovah “the
young bulls of our lips,” our very best “sacri?ce of
praise.” (Hosea 14:2; Hebrews 13:15) Then we can
leave the results up to God. He will draw out those
who are truly sheep. (John 6:44) Furthermore, you
21. What can you learn from the example of Amos in dealing with Amaziah’s threat?
22. Why can you say that the ministry is successful in your territory?
236

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HOW WILL YOU RESPOND?
? What lesson can you learn from God’s people being compared to swarms of insects?
—Joel 1:4; 2:3; Acts 20:24.
? How can you show that you are aware of
the need to be thorough in your ministry?
—Amos 7:14, 15; Micah 1:1-4; Acts 10:42.
? Why can you be con?dent that your proclaiming of the day of Jehovah is a success
in God’s eyes?—Malachi 3:10.
can be successful as a proclaimer of the divine message regardless of how people respond. You can rest
assured that “the feet of one bringing good news, one
publishing peace,” are beautiful in the eyes of those
who appreciatively accept the good news. But more
than anything else, they are beautiful in Jehovah’s
eyes. (Nahum 1:15; Isaiah 52:7) With the great day
of Jehovah so close, be determined to continue doing what Joel foretold for our time: “Proclaim this,
you people, among the nations, ‘Sanctify war! Arouse
the powerful men!’ ” That means God’s war against
the nations.—Joel 3:9.
“Proclaim This, You People, Among the Nations”

237

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

“A B LES SING U NTIL T HERE I S
N O M ORE WANT ”
OURS is a time of judgment and of blessing. It is a period of religious decay and of spiritual restoration.
Surely you should want the blessing as well as the present and future good e?ects of the spiritual restoration!
But how can you be assured of these? The answer involves a prophecy that had its major ful?llment soon
after “the last days” began in 1914. (2 Timothy 3:1) Malachi foretold: “ ‘There will come to His temple the true
Lord [Jehovah], whom you people are seeking, and the
messenger of the covenant in whom you are delighting.
Look! He will certainly come,’ Jehovah of armies has
said.”—Malachi 3:1.
2

This prophecy that has crucial significance in your

life is found in the last of the 12 prophetic books. As we
conclude our discussion of them, what Malachi wrote
is of particular note. His book includes vital instruction
1, 2. (a) What beneficial choices can each one of us make? (b) The fulfillment of what prophecy has a bearing on the blessings we can enjoy?
238

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

that allows you and others of Jehovah’s servants to receive “a blessing until there is no more want.” (Malachi
3:10) Let us take a closer look at chapter 3 of Malachi’s
book.

THE TIME FOR SPIRITUAL CLEANSING
3

Some ?ve centuries after Malachi’s time, Jehovah,

represented by Christ (God’s “messenger of the [Abrahamic] covenant”), came to the literal temple in Jerusalem to judge His covenant people. In general that
nation had proved unworthy of continued favor, so Jehovah rejected it. (Matthew 23:37, 38) You can see
proof of that in what occurred in 70 C.E. You can be
just as sure that God chose instead “the Israel of God,”
a spiritual nation of 144,000 taken from all nations.
(Galatians 6:16; Romans 3:25, 26) Yet, that was not the
?nal outworking of Malachi’s prophecy. It also points
to modern times and has a direct bearing on your future prospects for “a blessing until there is no more
want.”
4

The ful?llment of Bible prophecy con?rms that in

3. What development among God’s ancient people led to the choosing of
“the Israel of God”?
4. What needed to be answered after Jesus was enthroned in 1914?
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

239

1914, Jesus Christ was installed as King of Jehovah’s
heavenly Kingdom. Then came the time for Jesus to
identify a group of Christians who merited divine approval. Who would stand the test of spiritual purity?
You can ?nd the answer indicated in Malachi’s words:
“Who will be putting up with the day of his coming, and
who will be the one standing when he appears? For he
will be like the ?re of a re?ner.” (Malachi 3:2) When
and how did Jehovah come to his “temple” for judgment?
5

Obviously, God did not come to a temple of stone

and mortar. The last such literal temple for true worship had been destroyed in 70 C.E. Rather, Jehovah
came to a spiritual temple, the arrangement by which
humans can approach and worship him on the basis of
Jesus’ ransom sacri?ce. (Hebrews 9:2-10, 23-28) The
churches of Christendom certainly did not constitute
that spiritual temple, for they were part of a religious
system guilty of bloodshed and spiritual harlotry, one
that promoted false teachings rather than pure worship. Jehovah became “a speedy witness against” such,
5, 6. (a) When Jehovah came to his spiritual temple for inspection, what
did he ?nd among the majority of professed worshippers? (b) What did
God’s spirit-anointed servants need?
240

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

and you know that his adverse judgment was just. (Malachi 3:5) However, after God’s Kingdom was established, there was a group of true Christians serving in
the courtyards of God’s spiritual temple who demonstrated their allegiance to God through severe trials.
Nonetheless, even those anointed ones needed some
puri?cation. The writings of the 12 prophets pointed to
such, for they contain heartwarming promises of spiritual and physical restoration among God’s servants.
Malachi foretold that there would be a people whom Jehovah would “clarify . . . like gold and like silver.” They
would “certainly become to Jehovah people presenting
a gift o?ering in righteousness.”—Malachi 3:3.
6

According to substantial evidence available, from

1918 onward Jehovah provided the needed cleansing for
anointed Christians, purifying their worship, practices,
and doctrines.1 They and the “great crowd” who later
joined them have greatly bene?ted. (Revelation 7:9) As
a united group, they continue to present “a gift o?ering
in righteousness” that is “gratifying to Jehovah.”—Malachi 3:3, 4.
1 For further information, see The Watchtower of June 15, 1987, pages 14-20.
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

241

7

That is true of God’s people collectively, but what

about each of us individually? You might ask: ‘Are there
aspects of my attitude and actions that still need re?nement? Do I still need to re?ne my conduct, even as Jehovah has re?ned his anointed?’ We saw earlier that
the 12 prophets highlighted negative views and conduct
as well as positive traits and deeds. Their doing so has
put you in a better position to know what Jehovah is
“asking back from you.” (Micah 6:8) Note “from you.”
That emphasizes why each of us should analyze whether some more re?ning or cleansing on a personal level
is in order.

“TEST ME OUT, PLEASE”
8

Consider what Jehovah goes on to say through Mal-

achi in chapter 3, verse 10. There you will ?nd this
warm invitation: “ ‘Bring all the tenth parts into the
storehouse, that there may come to be food in my
house; and test me out, please, in this respect,’ Jehovah
of armies has said, ‘whether I shall not open to you people the ?oodgates of the heavens and actually empty
7. What can we appropriately ask ourselves about our standing with God?
8. What invitation has Jehovah extended to his people?
242

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

out upon you a blessing until there is no more want.’ ”
That o?er is extended to God’s people as a whole. Do
you feel that it is also a personal invitation to you?
9

How can you give “the tenth parts” to Jehovah? Of

course, you are not obliged to present literal o?erings
and tithes, such as prescribed under the Law. O?erings
of a spiritual kind are what God now expects. As discussed in the preceding chapter, Paul described your
witnessing work as an o?ering. (Hosea 14:2) The apostle then mentioned another type of sacri?ce, writing:
“Do not forget the doing of good and the sharing of
[material] things with others, for with such sacri?ces
God is well pleased.” (Hebrews 13:15, 16) It is thus obvious that “the tenth parts” mentioned at Malachi 3:10
represent spiritual and material o?erings. As a baptized
Christian, you are fully dedicated to Jehovah, but your
tithe represents the portion of what is yours that you
are able to bring to Jehovah, or use in his service. It includes the time, energy, resources, and material contributions that you make available for use in Jehovah’s
service.
9. What kind of o?erings and tithes can you present to Jehovah?
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

243

10

How appropriate it is that you o?er such symbolic

tithes to Jehovah with feelings of devotion and love! A
sense of urgency is also involved. You realize that the
great day of Jehovah is fast approaching and that it is
“very fear-inspiring.” (Joel 2:1, 2, 11) Lives are at stake.
God extends an invitation that you can personally respond to. Jehovah asks you to ‘test him out.’ Of course,
no lowly human should dare put Jehovah to the test as
if God were untrustworthy. (Hebrews 3:8-10) But you
can humbly test him in a proper sense. How? He promised a blessing. When you obey him, you make a test of
God, as if asking ‘Will he bless me?’ In response, he
puts himself under obligation to do so, keeping his
promise. Thus, God’s allowing you to ‘test him out’ underscores your conviction that he will bless you abundantly.
11

You can see that Jehovah’s people have made gen-

erous material o?erings and spiritual sacri?ces. And Jehovah has poured out “a blessing until there is no more
want.” You may have observed that blessing being be10. In what sense can you ?ttingly ‘test Jehovah out’?
11, 12. What blessings from Jehovah upon his people have you personally witnessed?
244

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

stowed upon God’s people, as re?ected in the dramatic numerical growth that Jehovah’s Witnesses have enjoyed from the early part of the 20th century down to
our day. You have also seen a marked increase in the
understanding of “the deep things of God.” (1 Corinthians 2:10; Proverbs 4:18) Think, though, of this from another angle: How have you personally been impacted?
12

At one time you may have been a church member,

or you may have been one who had just begun attending the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. At that point,
how much of the Bible’s basic truths did you grasp?
Now contrast that with what you have learned since
then and can prove directly from the Scriptures. Or
think of deeper things you have come to understand, including prophecies that are now being ful?lled. And
consider your progress in applying certain Bible passages in practical aspects of life. What steps forward
you have made! In your own case, you can say, as did
the apostle Peter: “We have the prophetic word made
more sure.” (2 Peter 1:19) The point is: You have personally been “taught by Jehovah” and are among a people who practice real Christianity and want to serve
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

245

Jehovah forever. (Isaiah 54:13) Already you can validly
say that he has greatly blessed you.

YOUR NAME IN THE B O OK OF LIFE
13

You ?nd further blessings from Jehovah mentioned

at Malachi 3:16: “At that time those in fear of Jehovah
spoke with one another, each one with his companion,
and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening. And a
book of remembrance began to be written up before
him for those in fear of Jehovah and for those thinking
upon his name.” Both the anointed and those of the
great crowd manifest this reverential “fear of Jehovah.”
Do you not consider it a privilege to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, a part of a happy people who think
upon Jehovah’s name and magnify it globally? How
content you can personally be, having the assurance
that Jehovah remembers your faithfulness!—Hebrews
6:10.
14

Yet, how can you as an individual qualify to have

your name included in that “book of remembrance,”
13. How is it possible to have one’s name recorded in God’s book of remembrance?
14. How have the 12 prophets helped you to see what attitudes and practices Jehovah abhors?
246

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

HOW HAVE YOU BEEN AFFECTED?
? How have you bene?ted from the spiritual
cleansing of Jehovah’s modern-day people?
—Daniel 12:10; Malachi 3:12.
? Why do you want to increase the sacri?ces
that you o?er to God?—Hosea 14:2;
1 Peter 2:5.
which is even now being written before Jehovah? Recall
some of the wise counsel that we have found in the
books of the 12 prophets. We gained insight into conduct, qualities, and attitudes that displease Jehovah.
For example, the prophets alerted us to practices that
God says con?ict with his righteous standards and can
ruin our lives, such as “loose conduct” and the “spirit
of fornication.” (Hosea 4:12; 6:9) God detests those who
deal treacherously with a mate or, by extension, other
family members. (Malachi 2:15, 16) Jehovah inspired
the prophets to emphasize that he takes no pleasure in
violence, whatever its form. (Amos 3:10) He likewise
had them highlight the need to avoid injustice or dishonesty in business and ?nancial dealings. (Amos 5:24;
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

247

Malachi 3:5) And the 12 books stressed how important
it is that men entrusted with authority not allow their
judgment to be clouded by partiality or sel?sh interests.—Micah 7:3, 4.
15

The prophets, though, did more than draw our at-

tention to things we ought to avoid. They spotlighted
bene?ts we can enjoy by upholding God’s standards.
Our relationship with Jehovah will be more intimate.
(Micah 4:5) Our congregation will be more stable and
active when righteousness thrives. Our marriage will be
stronger, and our family will be more united, more centered on spiritual things. (Hosea 2:19; 11:4) By acting
justly and honestly, we will gain others’ respect. In imitation of Jehovah’s mercy, we will display compassion
and loving-kindness and experience such in return from
our brothers and sisters. (Micah 7:18, 19) Yes, we will
be surrounded by spiritual people, brothers and sisters
who love truth and peace, and above all, we will have
gained Jehovah’s friendship. (Zechariah 8:16, 19) Do
you not agree that these are blessings that you already
experience?
15. What are some ?ne bene?ts you will receive from following the exhortations of the 12 prophets?
248

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

16

As a result of what we have just considered, it is so

true that “the distinction between a righteous one and
a wicked one”—between true and false Christians—is
plainer than ever. (Malachi 3:18) We are striving to
measure up to Jehovah’s standards while the world in
general descends deeper into a mire of ungodliness.
And you know that this di?erence will have serious implications when “the great day of Jehovah” arrives.
—Zephaniah 1:14; Matthew 25:46.
17

Clearly, then, the counsel of the 12 prophets is

timeless. As you face speci?c challenges or decisions,
you may want to review the practical information presented in the chapters of this book. Thus you can show
your continuous desire to be instructed in Jehovah’s
ways and to “walk in his paths.” (Micah 4:2) Walking in
that way, however, involves more than the here and
now. Your earnest desire is to have your name written
in Jehovah’s book of remembrance permanently, is it
not? The books of the 12 prophets can help you to
that end.
16. What distinction is evident today, and what will this mean at Jehovah’s
day of reckoning?
17. In the future, how can you use the information in this book?
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

249

FAITH LEADS TO SALVATION
18

Underscoring a major factor that can bring you

God’s lasting approval, Joel stated: “Everyone who calls
on the name of Jehovah will get away safe.” (Joel 2:32)
Two apostles, Peter and Paul, quoted this vital requirement. (Acts 2:21; Romans 10:13) Paul added another
facet to that exhortation when he asked: “How will they
call on him in whom they have not put faith?” (Romans
10:14) As for you, surely you want to call on the name
of Jehovah and exercise faith in him now and forever!
19

Calling on Jehovah’s name involves more than just

knowing and using God’s personal name. (Isaiah 1:15)
The context of Joel 2:32 stresses true repentance and
trust in Jehovah’s forgiveness. (Joel 2:12, 13) Calling on
God’s name implies truly coming to know him, trust
him, obey him, and put him ?rst in our life. Yes, serving
Jehovah becomes our top priority. That, in turn, greatly contributes to a satisfying and lasting life, which is a
blessing from God.—Matthew 6:33.
20

Jehovah stated through Habakkuk: “As for the

18. What vital requirement do you ?nd at Joel 2:32, and what did the apostle Paul add to that requirement?
19. What is involved in calling on the name of Jehovah?
20. As you exercise faith, what marvelous reward becomes possible?
250

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

righteous one, by his faithfulness he will keep living.”
(Habakkuk 2:4) Be sure to ?x that deeply in mind and
heart. It is one of the Bible’s central truths. Paul pointed to that scripture three times in his inspired writings.1 (Romans 1:16, 17; Galatians 3:11, 14; Hebrews 10:
38) This truth calls on you to exercise faith in the
sacri?ce that Jesus Christ o?ered for our sins. Jesus explained: “God loved the world so much that he gave his
only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising
faith in him might . . . have everlasting life.” We also
read: “He that exercises faith in the Son has everlasting
life.” (John 3:16, 36) That sacri?ce provides for the
healing that only our Redeemer can o?er. After recording Jehovah’s statement of what His great day will do
to Satan’s wicked world, Malachi continued: “To you
who are in fear of my name the sun of righteousness
will certainly shine forth, with healing in its wings.”
Yes, Jesus will shine forth with healing. That involves
the spiritual healing that we experience now. Yet, how
thrilling it is to think that it will extend to full physical healing in the new world!—Malachi 4:2.
1 Paul quoted from the Greek Septuagint, where the wording di?ers
slightly from the Hebrew text.
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

251

21

It is also vital to put faith in God’s ability to accom-

plish his will. In Micah’s day, it was di?cult to trust fellow humans. The prophet noted: “Do not put your faith
in a companion. Do not put your trust in a con?dential
friend.” Still, Micah had no problem trusting in Jehovah; neither should you. Micah stated: “As for me, it is
for Jehovah that I shall keep on the lookout.” (Micah
7:5, 7) Unlike unpredictable humans, Jehovah has the
will and the power to ful?ll his purpose for the vindication of his sovereignty and the lasting welfare of men
of faith.
22

You can con?dently echo Habakkuk’s words: “I

will exult in Jehovah himself; I will be joyful in the
God of my salvation.” (Habakkuk 3:18) The prophet Joel makes clear a reason for joy on the part of
those calling upon Jehovah’s name in faith: They
“will get away safe” or, as Paul expressed it, “will be
saved.” (Joel 2:32; Romans 10:13) Safe, or saved, in
what sense? Your exercising faith has already saved
you from the crafty acts of Satan and the many
21. Why can you have faith in Jehovah’s ability to accomplish his will?
22. Those calling upon the name of Jehovah in faith can experience what
outcome?
252

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

painful experiences that the wicked must face. (1 Peter 1:18) More than that, though, you can look forward with con?dence to salvation through the catastrophic end of this wicked system of things. That
will open the way for you to enjoy a host of blessings that were pointed to by the 12 prophets.

GLIMPSES OF PARADISE
23

There are lasting blessings in store for those “in

fear of Jehovah.” (Malachi 3:16) Some of the 12 prophets provided vivid glimpses of the earthly Paradise just
ahead, descriptions that can ?ll you with joy and anticipation. For example, Micah wrote: “They will actually
sit, each one under his vine and under his ?g tree, and
there will be no one making them tremble.” (Micah 4:4)
Truly, under God’s Kingdom, you will feel secure and
will reap the fruits of your labor!
24

It is not mere wishful thinking for you to look for-

ward to the end of sickness, grief, and even death. Imagine the joy that will come to those raised back to life
23, 24. (a) What are some glimpses of Paradise o?ered by the 12 prophets? (b) How has your outlook on the future been a?ected by what the 12
prophets wrote?
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

253

with the prospect of attaining human perfection! They
will experience in an extended way on earth what Hosea 13:14 points to: “From the hand of Sheol I shall redeem them; from death I shall recover them. Where are
your stings, O Death? Where is your destructiveness,
O Sheol?” Paul applied that verse to the heavenly resurrection.—1 Corinthians 15:55-57.
25

It should not be too di?cult to believe that

an earthly resurrection will happen. (Zechariah 8:6)
When Amos and Micah foretold that God’s people
would return from exile, that may have seemed hard
to believe. Yet, you know that it did happen. (Amos
9:14, 15; Micah 2:12; 4:1-7) The returnees responded: “We became like those who were dreaming. At
that time our mouth came to be ?lled with laughter, and our tongue with a joyful cry. . . . Jehovah
has done a great thing in what he has done with us.
We have become joyful.” (Psalm 126:1-3) That is
how you will feel in the new world upon experiencing “a blessing until there is no more want.”
26

After “the day of Jehovah” cleanses the earth of

25. You will have what feelings in the new world?
26. What awaits those who live with Jehovah’s day in mind?
254

Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind

LIVE WITH JEHOVAH’S DAY IN MIND

? Why do you feel that it is vital to keep
Habakkuk 2:4 in mind?—Hosea 2:18, 20.
? How have the 12 prophets heightened your
expectations of the new world?
—Psalm 126:1-3.
? Why are you determined to live with Jehovah’s day in mind?—Joel 2:1, 2; Habakkuk
2:2, 3.
wickedness, “the kingship must become Jehovah’s”
in a fuller sense. (Obadiah 15, 21) Will that not be
a marvelous blessing for all his earthly subjects?
And you can be among those to whom the words of
Malachi chapter 3 will apply: “ ‘They will certainly become mine,’ Jehovah of armies has said, . . .
‘And I will show compassion upon them, just as a
man shows compassion upon his son who is serving him.’ ” (Malachi 3:17) Clearly, your faithfulness,
which now puts you in line to be saved, will then
open to you “a blessing until there is no more want.”
What a marvelous prospect!
“A Blessing Until There Is No More Want”

255

Visit www.jw.org, or contact
Jehovah’s Witnesses for more information.

