JESUS

THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE

jy-E
160611

5 2015 WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT
SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of
New York, Inc., Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.

Sidon

September 2015 Printing

Damascus

PH
OE
NI
AL
CI
IL
A
EE

Zarephath

This publication is not for sale. It is
provided as part of a worldwide Bible
educational work supported by
voluntary donations.

Mt. Hermon

Tyre

Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture
quotations are from the modernlanguage New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures.
Jesus—The Way, the Truth, the Life
English (jy-E)

Caesarea Philippi

3

Made in the United
States of America

G

Chorazin
Bethsaida
Capernaum
Cana Magadan Sea of Gergesa
Galilee
Hippo(s)
Tiberias

Nazareth
Nain

THE AREAS
WHERE JESUS
LIVED AND
TAUGHT

2

Canatha

Dion
Abila

Gadara

DECAPOLIS

Scythopolis

Bethany? (across the Jordan)
Pella

(Beth-shean)

SAMAR I A

Raphana

Salim
Aenon
Gerasa

Sebaste
(Samaria)

Sychar

Jordan River

Mt. Gerizim Jacob’s Well

Arimathea
Ephraim

6

JUDEA

4

5

Philadelphia
(Rabbah)

Jericho

Bethphage
Bethany

Jerusalem

Bethlehem

1

Hebron

Wilderness of Judea

Emmaus

Ramah

PEREA

Salt
Sea
(Dead
Sea)

Cities of the Decapolis
Main roads
0 mi

20

0 km

Numbers correspond to book sections
1 B.C.E.

1 C.E.

2

1
TIME COVERED

2

///
29

30

20

3
31

4 5 6
32

33 C.E.

Ramah

6

Sidon

Mount of
Olives

Jerusalem

0 mi
0 km

5

Damascus

Zarephath

PH
OE
NI
AL
CI
IL
A
EE

Emmaus

Bethphage

Mt. Hermon

Tyre

Bethany

Caesarea Philippi

3

Bethlehem

5

G

JERUSALEM AREA

Cana

Chorazin
Bethsaida
Capernaum
Sea of Gergesa
Magadan Galilee
Hippo(s)
Tiberias

Nazareth
Nain

THE AREAS
WHERE JESUS
LIVED AND
TAUGHT

2

Canatha

Dion
Abila

Gadara

DECAPOLIS

Scythopolis

Bethany? (across the Jordan)
Pella

(Beth-shean)

SAMAR I A

Raphana

Salim
Aenon
Gerasa

Sebaste
(Samaria)

Sychar

Jordan River

Mt. Gerizim Jacob’s Well

Arimathea
Ephraim

6

JUDEA

4

5

Philadelphia
(Rabbah)

Jericho

Bethphage
Bethany

Jerusalem

Bethlehem

1

Hebron

Wilderness o
f Judea

Emmaus

Ramah

PEREA

Salt
Sea
(Dead
Sea)


of the Decapolis
 Cities
Main roads
0 mi

20

0 km

Numbers correspond to book sections
1 B.C.E.

1 C.E.

2

1
TIME COVERED

2

///
29

30

20

3
31

4 5 6
32

33 C.E.

JESUS
THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE
An account of the life and ministry of Jesus
that reveals what he was like, what he taught and did,
and how you can bene?t.

This book is the property of
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1

LEADING UP TO JESUS’ MINISTRY

PAGE

1

Two Messages From God

10

2

Jesus Is Honored Before His Birth
Someone to Prepare the Way Is Born
Mary—Pregnant But Not Married
Jesus’ Birth—Where and When?
The Child Who Was Promised
Astrologers Visit Jesus
They Escape From a Wicked Ruler
Growing Up in Nazareth
Jesus’ Family Travels to Jerusalem
John the Baptist Prepares the Way

12

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

2
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

3
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30

THE BEGINNING OF JESUS’ MINISTRY
Jesus Gets Baptized
Learn From the Way Jesus Faced Temptations
Jesus Begins to Make Disciples
Performing His First Miracle
Jesus Shows Zeal for True Worship
He Teaches Nicodemus at Night
Jesus Increases as John Decreases
Teaching a Samaritan Woman

34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48

JESUS’ GREAT MINISTRY IN GALILEE
Second Miracle While in Cana
At the Synagogue in Nazareth
Four Disciples Will Be Fishers of Men
Jesus Performs Great Works in Capernaum
Expanding His Ministry in Galilee
Compassionately Curing a Leper
“Your Sins Are Forgiven”
Matthew Is Called
Why Do Jesus’ Disciples Not Fast?
Can One Do Good Works on the Sabbath?

54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72

PAGE

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

Jesus’ Relationship With His Father
Plucking Grain on the Sabbath
What Is Lawful on the Sabbath?
Ful?lling Isaiah’s Prophecy
Jesus Chooses Twelve Apostles
The Famous Sermon on the Mount
A Centurion Shows Great Faith
Jesus Resurrects a Widow’s Son
John Wants to Hear From Jesus
Woe to an Unresponsive Generation
A Lesson in Forgiveness
Miracles—By Whose Power?
Jesus Rebukes the Pharisees
Illustrations About the Kingdom
Jesus Silences a Storm at Sea
Power Over Many Demons
Healed by Touching Jesus’ Garment
A Young Girl Lives Again!
Performing Miracles, But Rejected Even in Nazareth
Preaching in Galilee and Training the Apostles
Prepared to Preach Despite Persecution
Murder During a Birthday Party
Feeding Thousands With a Few Loaves and Fish
A Ruler Who Can Control the Elements
Jesus—“The Bread of Life”
Jesus’ Words Shock Many
What Really De?les a Person?
Jesus Cures a Girl and a Deaf Man
He Multiplies Loaves and Warns About Leaven
Who Is the Son of Man?
The Trans?guration—A View of Christ in Glory
Jesus Heals a Demon-Possessed Boy
An Important Lesson in Humility
Jesus O?ers Counsel About Stumbling and Sin
The Need to Forgive
Teaching While Traveling to Jerusalem

74
76
78
80
82
84
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106
112
114
116
118
120
122
124
126
128
130
132
134
136
138
140
142
144
146
148
150
152
154

4

JESUS’ LATER MINISTRY IN JUDEA

PAGE

66 In Jerusalem for the Festival of Tabernacles

158

67 “Never Has Any Man Spoken Like This”

160

68 “The Light of the World”—The Son of God

162

Their Father—Abraham or the Devil?
70 Jesus Heals a Man Born Blind
71 Pharisees Confront the Man Who Was Blind
72 Jesus Sends 70 Disciples to Preach
73 A Samaritan Proves to Be a Real Neighbor
74 Lessons About Hospitality and Prayer
75 Jesus Reveals the Source of Happiness
76 Dining With a Pharisee
77 Jesus Gives Counsel About Riches
78 Keep Ready, Faithful Steward!
79 Why Destruction Is Ahead
80 The Fine Shepherd and the Sheepfolds
81 One With the Father, But Not God

164

69

5
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

166
168
170
172
174
176
178
180
182
184
186
188

JESUS’ LATER MINISTRY EAST OF THE JORDAN
Jesus’ Ministry in Perea
Invitations to a Meal—Whom Does God Invite?
Discipleship—How Serious?
Rejoicing Over the Sinner Who Repents
The Son Who Was Lost Returns
Plan Ahead—Use Practical Wisdom
A Change for the Rich Man and for Lazarus
Teaching in Perea on the Way to Judea
“The Resurrection and the Life”
Lazarus Is Resurrected
Ten Lepers Healed—One Shows Gratitude
The Son of Man Will Be Revealed
Two Great Needs—Prayer and Humility
Teaching About Divorce and Love for Children
Jesus Answers a Rich Young Ruler
Illustration of the Workers in the Vineyard
The Apostles Again Seek Prominence
Jesus Heals Blind Men and Helps Zacchaeus
His Illustration of Ten Minas

192
194
196
198
200
204
206
210
212
214
216
218
220
222
224
226
228
230
232

6
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139

JESUS’ FINAL MINISTRY
A Meal at Simon’s House in Bethany
The King Enters Jerusalem on a Colt
The Temple Cleansed Again
The Jews Hear God’s Voice—Will They Show Faith?
A Fig Tree Is Used to Teach a Lesson About Faith
Two Illustrations About Vineyards
A King Calls Those Invited to a Marriage Feast
Jesus Thwarts Attempts to Entrap Him
Denouncing Religious Opposers
Jesus’ Final Day at the Temple
The Apostles Ask for a Sign
A Lesson in Vigilance—The Virgins
A Lesson in Diligence—The Talents
Christ in Power Judges the Sheep and the Goats
Jesus’ Final Passover Approaches
Teaching Humility at the Last Passover
The Lord’s Evening Meal
A Dispute Over Greatness
Jesus—The Way, the Truth, the Life
Bearing Fruit as Branches and Being Jesus’ Friends
“Take Courage! I Have Conquered the World”
Jesus’ Concluding Prayer in the Upper Room
Praying When Deeply Grieved
Christ Is Betrayed and Arrested
Jesus Is Taken to Annas, Then to Caiaphas
Denials at the House of Caiaphas
Tried by the Sanhedrin, Then On to Pilate
Found Innocent by Both Pilate and Herod
Pilate Proclaims: “Look! The Man!”
Jesus Is Handed Over and Led Away to Die
An Innocent King Su?ers on the Stake
“Certainly This Man Was God’s Son”
Jesus’ Body Is Prepared and Buried
An Empty Tomb—Jesus Is Alive!
The Resurrected Jesus Appears to Many
On the Shore of the Sea of Galilee
Hundreds See Him Prior to Pentecost
Christ at God’s Right Hand
Jesus Brings Paradise and Finishes His Assignment

PAGE

236

NISAN 8, 9

238

NISAN 9

240
242

NISAN 10

244
246
248
250
252
254

NISAN 11

256
260
262
264
266

NISAN 12, 13

268
270
272
274
276
278

NISAN 14
(night)

280
282
284
286
288
290
292
294
296

NISAN 14
(day)

298
300
302
304
306
308
310
312
314

NISAN 15
NISAN 16

THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE
You likely are pleased to get good news. And
there de?nitely is very good news for you and
your loved ones.
This good news is in the Bible, a book that
the Creator of the universe, Jehovah God, caused
to be written years ago. In this publication, we
will focus on four Bible books that contain very
good news for all of us. They are identi?ed by
the names of the men whom God used to write
them—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.
Many refer to these four accounts as the four
Gospels. All four relate the gospel, or good news,
about Jesus—that he is God’s means for salvation and that as King of God’s heavenly Kingdom,
Jesus will bring permanent blessings to all who
exercise faith in him.—Mark 10:17, 30; 13:13.

WHY FOUR GOSPELS?
You may have wondered why God inspired
four accounts of Jesus’ life and teachings.

There are bene?ts to having these separate
accounts of what Jesus said and did. To illustrate, imagine that four men are standing near a
famous teacher. The man standing in front of the
teacher has a tax o?ce. The one on the right is a
physician. The man listening from the left side is
a ?sherman and is the teacher’s very close friend.
And the fourth man, located at the back, is an
observer who is younger than the others. All
four are honest men, and each has a distinct
interest or focus. If each writes an account of the
teacher’s sayings and activities, the four records
would likely feature di?erent details or events.
By considering all four accounts, bearing in mind
the varying perspectives or objectives, we could
get a complete picture of what the teacher said
and did. This illustrates how we can bene?t from
having four separate accounts of the life of the
Great Teacher, Jesus.
Continuing the illustration, the tax man wants

to appeal to people of a Jewish background,
so he groups some teachings or events in a way
to help that primary audience. The physician
highlights the healing of the sick or crippled, so
he omits some things that the tax man recorded
or presents them in a di?erent order. The close
friend emphasizes the teacher’s feelings and
qualities. The younger man’s account is briefer,
more succinct. Still, each man’s account is accurate. This well illustrates how having all four accounts of Jesus’ life enriches our understanding
of his activities, teachings, and personality.
People may speak of ‘the Gospel of Matthew’
or ‘John’s Gospel.’ That is not inaccurate, for
each contains “good news about Jesus Christ.”
(Mark 1:1) However, in a larger sense, there
is but one overall gospel, or good news, about
Jesus—available to us in the four records.
Many students of God’s Word have compared
and harmonized the events and facts found in
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. About 170 C.E.,
the Syrian writer Tatian endeavored to do so.
He recognized these four books as accurate and
inspired, and he compiled the Diatessaron, a harmonized account of Jesus’ life and ministry.
Jesus—The Way, the Truth, the Life does similarly, but it is more accurate and complete. That
is possible because we now better understand
the ful?llment of many of Jesus’ prophecies
and illustrations. This understanding clari?es the
things he said and did, as well as the order in
which events occurred. Archaeological discoveries have also shed light on certain details and on
the writers’ perspectives. Of course, no one can
be dogmatic about the sequence of every event.

But Jesus—The Way, the Truth, the Life presents
what is reasonable and logical.

THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE
As you read and enjoy this book, try to bear
in mind the primary message for you and your
loved ones. Recall that Jesus Christ himself told
the apostle Thomas: “I am the way and the truth
and the life. No one comes to the Father except
through me.”—John 14:6.
Jesus—The Way, the Truth, the Life will help you
to appreciate how Jesus de?nitely is “the way.”
Only through him is it possible to approach
Jehovah God in prayer. Moreover, Jesus is the
way for us to be reconciled to God. (John 16:23;
Romans 5:8) Hence, only through Jesus can we
have an approved relationship with God.
Jesus is “the truth.” He spoke and lived in
harmony with truth; it was as if truth arrived in
the person of Jesus. He ful?lled scores of prophecies, which became “ ‘yes’ by means of him.”
(2 Corinthians 1:20; John 1:14) Such prophecies
help us to see his central role in the outworking
of God’s purpose.—Revelation 19:10.
And Jesus Christ is “the life.” By means of the
ransom, his giving up his perfect life and blood,
he made it possible for us to gain “the real life,”
that is, “everlasting life.” (1 Timothy 6:12, 19;
Ephesians 1:7; 1 John 1:7) He will also prove to
be “the life” for millions who have died but who
will be raised to life with the prospect of living
in Paradise forever.—John 5:28, 29.
All of us need to appreciate Jesus’ role in God’s
purpose. May you enjoy learning more about
Jesus—“the way and the truth and the life.”

S E CT I O N

1
LEADING UP TO
JESUS’
MINISTRY

“THIS ONE
WILL BE GREAT.”
—LUKE 1:32

TWO MESSAGES FROM GOD
LUKE 1:5-33

We can consider the entire Bible to be, in effect, a message from God. Our heavenly Father has provided it for our instruction. Consider, though, two special messages that were
delivered over 2,000 years ago. They were delivered by an angel named Gabriel, who “stands
near before God.” (Luke 1:19) What were the
circumstances under which the angel provided
those important messages?
It is about the year 3 B.C.E. Where does Gabriel deliver the ?rst message? In the Judean hills, probably not far from Jerusalem, there
lives a priest of Jehovah by the name of Zechariah. He and his wife, Elizabeth, are no longer
young, and they have no children. It is Zechariah’s turn to serve as a priest at God’s temple in
Jerusalem. While Zechariah is at the temple, Gabriel suddenly appears near the incense altar.
Understandably, that frightens Zechariah.
But the angel calms Zechariah’s fears, saying:
“Do not be afraid, Zechariah, because your supplication has been favorably heard, and your
wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are
to name him John.” Gabriel adds that John “will
be great in the sight of Jehovah” and will “get
ready for Jehovah a prepared people.”—Luke 1:
13-17.
To Zechariah, that seems unbelievable. Why?
Because of his and Elizabeth’s age. So Gabriel
tells him: “You will be silent and unable to speak

until the day these things take place, because
you did not believe my words.”—Luke 1:20.
Meanwhile, the people outside are wondering
why Zechariah is taking so long inside. Finally
he comes out, but he cannot speak. Zechariah
can only make signs with his hands. It is evident
that he has seen something supernatural while
in the temple.
After Zechariah ?nishes his service at the
temple, he returns to his home. Soon thereafter,
Elizabeth becomes pregnant! For ?ve months,
while awaiting the birth of her child, Elizabeth
stays at home away from people.
Then Gabriel appears a second time. To
whom? To a young unmarried woman named
Mary, who lives up north in the region called
Galilee, in the city of Nazareth. What does the
angel tell her? He says: “You have found favor
with God.” Gabriel goes on to tell Mary: “Look!
you will become pregnant and give birth to a
son, and you are to name him Jesus.” Gabriel
adds: “This one will be great and will be called
Son of the Most High, . . . and he will rule as King
over the house of Jacob forever, and there will
be no end to his Kingdom.”—Luke 1:30-33.
You can appreciate how privileged Gabriel
must feel to deliver these two messages. As we
read more about John and Jesus, it will be clear
why these messages from heaven are so important.

 Who delivers two important messages from heaven?
 To whom are the two messages delivered?
 Why, do you think, are the messages from heaven so di?cult to believe?
10

?

THE ANGEL GABRIEL FORETELLS THE BIRTH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST
? GABRIEL TELLS MARY OF THE COMING BIRTH OF JESUS

1

JESUS IS HONORED BEFORE HIS BIRTH
LUKE 1:34-56

After the angel Gabriel tells the young woman
Mary that she will bear a son who will be named
Jesus and who will rule as King forever, Mary
asks: “How is this to be, since I am not having
sexual relations with a man?”—Luke 1:34.
“Holy spirit will come upon you,” Gabriel answers, “and power of the Most High will overshadow you. And for that reason the one who is
born will be called holy, God’s Son.”—Luke 1:35.
Perhaps to help Mary accept his message,
Gabriel adds: “Look! Elizabeth your relative has
also conceived a son, in her old age, and this is
the sixth month for her, the so-called barren
woman; for no declaration will be impossible for
God.”—Luke 1:36, 37.
Mary accepts what Gabriel has said, as we
see from her response. “Look! Jehovah’s slave
girl!” she exclaims. “May it happen to me according to your declaration.”—Luke 1:38.
Once Gabriel leaves, Mary prepares to visit
Elizabeth, who lives with her husband, Zechariah, near Jerusalem in the Judean hillside. From
Mary’s home up in Nazareth, this is a trip that
might take three or four days.
Mary ?nally arrives at Zechariah’s house. As
she enters, she greets her relative Elizabeth. At
that, Elizabeth is ?lled with holy spirit, and she
says to Mary: “Blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruitage of your womb! So
how is it that this privilege is mine, to have the
mother of my Lord come to me? For look! as the
sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.”—Luke 1:42-44.
Mary then responds with heartfelt gratitude:
“My soul magni?es Jehovah, and my spirit can-

12

not keep from being overjoyed at God my Savior, because he has looked upon the low position of his slave girl. For look! from now on
all generations will declare me happy, because
the powerful One has done great deeds for
me.” We can note that despite the favor she is
shown, Mary directs all honor to God. “Holy is
his name,” she says, “and for generation after
generation his mercy is upon those who fear
him.”—Luke 1:46-50.
In inspired prophetic words, Mary continues
to praise God, saying: “He has acted mightily with his arm; he has scattered those who
are haughty in the intention of their hearts. He
has brought down powerful men from thrones
and has exalted lowly ones; he has fully satis?ed hungry ones with good things and has sent
away empty-handed those who had wealth. He
has come to the aid of Israel his servant, remembering his mercy, just as he spoke to our
forefathers, to Abraham and to his o?spring,
forever.”—Luke 1:51-55.
For about three months, Mary stays with Elizabeth, likely being of assistance during these
?nal weeks of Elizabeth’s pregnancy. How ?ne
it is that these two faithful women, both carrying a child with God’s help, can be together during this time in their lives!
And take note of the honor that Jesus was
paid even before he was born. Elizabeth called
him “my Lord,” and the child in her womb
“leaped for joy” when Mary ?rst appeared.
That is so di?erent from how others later treat
Mary and her yet-to-be-born child, as we shall
see.

?

MARY VISITS HER RELATIVE ELIZABETH

2

 What does Gabriel say that helps Mary to understand how she will become pregnant?
 How is Jesus honored before he is born?
 For how long does Mary stay with Elizabeth, and why does she do so?
13

SOMEONE TO PREPARE THE WAY IS BORN
LUKE 1:57-79

Elizabeth is almost ready to have her baby. For
three months, her relative Mary has been staying with her. Now it is time for Mary to say goodbye and make the long trip north to her home in
Nazareth. In about six months, she too will have
a son.
Soon after Mary leaves, Elizabeth gives birth.
What joy there is that the birth is successful and
that Elizabeth and the baby are in good health!
When Elizabeth shows her little son to neighbors and relatives, they rejoice with her.
God’s Law to Israel said that on the eighth
day after his birth, a baby boy must be circumcised, and he was also named then. (Leviticus 12:2, 3) Some feel that Zechariah’s son
should be named after him. However, Elizabeth
speaks up, saying: “No! but he will be called
John.” (Luke 1:60) Recall that the angel Gabriel said that this baby should be named John.

14

The neighbors and relatives protest: “Not one
of your relatives is called by this name.” (Luke
1:61) Using gestures, they ask Zechariah what
he wants to name his son. Zechariah asks for
a tablet and writes his answer: “John is his
name.”—Luke 1:63.
With that, Zechariah’s speech is miraculously restored. You may recall that he lost his ability to speak when he did not believe what the
angel said—namely, that Elizabeth would have a
son. So now, when Zechariah speaks, his neighbors are amazed and ask themselves: “What
will this young child turn out to be?” (Luke 1:66)
They see God’s hand in the way John was given
his name.
Then, ?lled with holy spirit, Zechariah declares: “Let Jehovah be praised, the God of Israel, because he has turned his attention to his
people and has brought them deliverance. And

?

he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in
the house of David his servant.” (Luke 1:68, 69)
By “horn of salvation,” he means the Lord Jesus, who is yet to be born. By means of that
One, Zechariah says, God will “grant us, after
we have been rescued from the hands of enemies, the privilege of fearlessly rendering sacred service to him with loyalty and righteousness before him all our days.”—Luke 1:74, 75.
Regarding his son, Zechariah foretells: “As
for you, young child, you will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go ahead of Je-

3

hovah to prepare his ways, to give knowledge of
salvation to his people by forgiveness of their
sins, because of the tender compassion of our
God. With this compassion a daybreak will visit us from on high, to give light to those sitting
in darkness and death’s shadow and to guide
our feet in the way of peace.” (Luke 1:76-79)
How encouraging that prophecy is!
By this time Mary, who evidently is not yet
married, has arrived home in Nazareth. What
will happen to her when it becomes obvious that
she is pregnant?

 What is the di?erence in age between John and Jesus?
 What happens when John is eight days old?
 John will have what assignment from God?

? JOHN THE BAPTIST IS BORN AND NAMED
ZECHARIAH FORETELLS JOHN’S FUTURE ROLE

MARY—PREGNANT BUT NOT MARRIED
MATTHEW 1:18-25 LUKE 1:56

Mary is in the fourth month of her pregnancy. Recall that she spent the early part of her
pregnancy visiting her relative Elizabeth in the
Judean hills to the south. But now Mary has
returned home to Nazareth. Here, her pregnancy will soon become public knowledge. Imagine
how distressing the situation is for her!
What makes matters worse is that Mary is
engaged to marry a local carpenter named Joseph. And she knows that according to God’s
Law to Israel, a woman who is engaged to one
man but who willingly has sexual relations with
another man is to be stoned to death. (Deuteronomy 22:23, 24) Hence, even though Mary
has not been immoral, she probably wonders
both how she can explain her pregnancy to Joseph and what will happen.

16

Mary has been away for three months, so we
can be sure that Joseph is eager to see her.
When they meet, Mary likely tells him of her condition, doing her best to explain that her pregnancy is by means of God’s holy spirit. Yet, as
you can imagine, this is a very di?cult thing for
Joseph to understand and to believe.
Joseph knows that Mary is a good woman and
that she has a ?ne reputation. And he loves her
dearly. Still, despite what she claims, it seems
to Joseph that she could only be pregnant by
some other man. Joseph does not want her to
be stoned to death or to be disgraced publicly; hence, he makes up his mind to divorce her
secretly. In those days, engaged people were
viewed as married, and a divorce was required
to end an engagement.

?

Later, while Joseph is still weighing these
matters, he goes to sleep. Jehovah’s angel appears to him in a dream and says: “Do not be
afraid to take your wife Mary home, for what has
been conceived in her is by holy spirit. She will
give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.”
—Matthew 1:20, 21.
When Joseph wakes up, how grateful he is
that the issue is now clearer! He does not delay
in doing what the angel directed. He takes Mary

JOSEPH LEARNS THAT MARY IS PREGNANT
? MARY BECOMES JOSEPH’S WIFE

4

to his home. This is a public action that serves,
in e?ect, as a marriage ceremony, giving notice
that Joseph and Mary are now a married couple. Nevertheless, Joseph does not have sexual relations with Mary while she is pregnant with
Jesus.
Months later, Joseph and Mary, who is heavy
with child, must get ready for a trip away
from their home in Nazareth. Where do they
need to go at a time when Mary is about to give
birth?

 When Joseph learns that Mary is pregnant, what must he think, and why?
 How could Joseph divorce Mary when they are not yet married?
 What public action establishes that Joseph and Mary are a married couple?

JESUS’ BIRTH—WHERE AND WHEN?
LUKE 2:1-20

Caesar Augustus, the emperor of the Roman
Empire, has decreed that everyone must be registered. So Joseph and Mary must travel to the
city of his birth, the city of Bethlehem, south of
Jerusalem.
Many people are in Bethlehem to register. The
only place that Joseph and Mary can ?nd to

stay is a stable, where donkeys and other animals are kept. Jesus is born there. Mary wraps
him in strips of cloth and lays him in a manger,
the place where food for the animals is put.
God must have seen to it that Caesar Augustus made this registration law. Why? Because this made it possible for Jesus to be
born in Bethlehem, the hometown of his ancestor King David. The Scriptures had long before
foretold that this would be the city where the
promised Ruler would be born.—Micah 5:2.
What an important night this is! Out in the
?elds, a bright light gleams around a group of
shepherds. It is Jehovah’s glory! One of God’s

angels tells the shepherds: “Do not be afraid,
for look! I am declaring to you good news of a
great joy that all the people will have. For today
there was born to you in David’s city a savior,
who is Christ the Lord. And this is a sign for you:
You will ?nd an infant wrapped in strips of cloth
and lying in a manger.” Suddenly, many more
angels appear and say: “Glory in the heights
above to God, and on earth peace among men
of goodwill.”—Luke 2:10-14.
When the angels leave, the shepherds say to
one another: “Let us by all means go over to
Bethlehem and see what has taken place, which
Jehovah has made known to us.” (Luke 2:15)
They go in a hurry and ?nd the newborn Jesus
just where the angel said they would. When the
shepherds relate what the angel told them, all
who hear about it are astonished. Mary cherishes all these sayings and draws conclusions in
her heart.
Many people today believe that Jesus was
born on December 25. But in the area of Bethlehem, December is rainy and cold. On occasion,
it even snows. At that time of the year, shepherds would hardly be out in the ?elds overnight
with their ?ocks. Also, it is unlikely that the Roman emperor would have required a people who
were already inclined to revolt against him to
travel for days in the dead of winter to register.
Evidently, Jesus was born sometime in October.

 Why do Joseph and Mary have to go to Bethlehem?
 On the night Jesus is born, what marvelous thing happens?
 Why is it not reasonable to think that Jesus was born on December 25?
18

?

? JESUS IS BORN IN BETHLEHEM
SHEPHERDS VISIT THE BABY JESUS

5

THE CHILD WHO WAS PROMISED
LUKE 2:21-39

Joseph and Mary remain in Bethlehem rather
than return to Nazareth. When Jesus is eight
days old, they have him circumcised, as God’s
Law to Israel commands. (Leviticus 12:2, 3) It is
also the custom to give a baby boy his name on
that day. They name their son Jesus, as the angel Gabriel had directed.
More than a month passes, and Jesus is 40
days old. Where do his parents now take him?
Up to the temple in Jerusalem, which is only a
few miles from where they are staying. The Law
says that 40 days after giving birth to a son, a
mother is required to present a puri?cation offering at the temple.—Leviticus 12:4-7.

“THE TIME CAME FOR PURIFYING
THEM” When Israelite women

gave birth, they were considered
ceremonially unclean for a time.
At the end of that time, a burnt
o?ering as a cleansing sacri?ce
was to be presented. All were thus
reminded that imperfect, sinful
life had been passed on. The infant Jesus was perfect and holy.
(Luke 1:35) Still, Mary and Joseph
“brought him up to” the temple
“for purifying them” as required
by the Law.—Luke 2:22.

20

Mary does that. As her o?ering, she brings
two small birds. This tells us something about
the economic situation of Joseph and Mary. According to the Law, a young ram and a bird
should be o?ered. But if the mother cannot afford a ram, two turtledoves or two pigeons will
su?ce. That is Mary’s situation and what she
o?ers.
At the temple, an aged man approaches Joseph and Mary. His name is Simeon. God has revealed to him that before he dies, he will see Jehovah’s promised Christ, or Messiah. This day
Simeon is directed by holy spirit to the temple,
where he ?nds Joseph and Mary with their infant son. Simeon takes the baby into his arms.
While holding Jesus, Simeon thanks God,
saying: “Now, Sovereign Lord, you are letting
your slave go in peace according to your declaration, because my eyes have seen your means
of salvation that you have prepared in the sight
of all the peoples, a light for removing the veil
from the nations and a glory of your people Israel.”—Luke 2:29-32.
Joseph and Mary are amazed to hear this.
Simeon blesses them and tells Mary that her
son “is appointed for the falling and the rising
again of many in Israel” and that sorrow, like a
sharp sword, will run through her.—Luke 2:34.
Someone else is present on this day. It is
Anna, an 84-year-old prophetess. Actually, she
is never missing from the temple. In this very
hour, she comes to Joseph, Mary, and the baby
Jesus. Anna begins thanking God and speaking
about Jesus to all who will listen.
You can imagine how Joseph and Mary rejoice
over these events at the temple! Surely, all of
this con?rms to them that their son is the Promised One of God.

?

JESUS IS CIRCUMCISED AND LATER
BROUGHT TO THE TEMPLE

6

 When was it the custom to give an Israelite baby boy his name?
 What was a mother required to do when her son was 40 days old, and what does Mary’s response
reveal about her economic situation?
 At the temple, who recognize the identity of Jesus, and how do they show this?
21

ASTROLOGERS VISIT JESUS
MATTHEW 2:1-12

Some men come from the East. They are astrologers—men who study the position of stars,
claiming that by doing so they are able to tell
the meaning of events in people’s lives. (Isaiah
47:13) While at home in the East, they saw a
“star” and followed it hundreds of miles, not to
Bethlehem, but to Jerusalem.
When the astrologers get there, they ask:
“Where is the one born king of the Jews? For we
saw his star when we were in the East, and we
have come to do obeisance to him.”—Matthew
2:1, 2.
King Herod of Jerusalem hears about this and
is very upset. So he calls the chief priests and
other Jewish religious leaders and asks them
where the Christ is to be born. Basing their reply on the Scriptures, they answer: “In Bethlehem.” (Matthew 2:5; Micah 5:2) At that, Herod has the astrologers secretly brought to him,
and he tells them: “Go make a careful search for
the young child, and when you have found him,

report back to me so that I too may go and do
obeisance to him.” (Matthew 2:8) However, Herod actually wants to ?nd the young child to kill
him!
After the astrologers leave, an amazing thing
happens. The “star” that they had seen when
they were in the East travels ahead of them.
Clearly, this is no ordinary star, but it has been
specially provided to direct them. The astrologers follow it until it stops right above the house
where Joseph and Mary are now living with their
young son.
When the astrologers enter the house, they
?nd Mary with a young child—Jesus. At that, the
astrologers bow down to him. And they give him
gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Afterward, when they are about to return to Herod,
they are warned by God in a dream not to do
that. So they leave for their own country by another route.
Who do you think provided the “star” that
guided the astrologers? Remember, it did not
guide them directly to Jesus in Bethlehem.
Rather, it led them to Jerusalem, where they
came in touch with King Herod, who wanted to
kill Jesus. And he would have done so had God
not stepped in and warned the astrologers not
to tell Herod where Jesus was. Clearly, it was
God’s enemy, Satan, who wanted Jesus killed,
and he used this means to try to accomplish his
purpose.

 How do we know that the “star” the astrologers saw was no ordinary star?
 Where is the young child Jesus living when the astrologers ?nd him?
 Why can we conclude that Satan guided the astrologers?
22

? ASTROLOGERS FOLLOW A “STAR”
TO JERUSALEM AND THEN TO JESUS

7

THEY ESCAPE FROM A WICKED RULER
MATTHEW 2:13-23

Joseph wakes Mary up to give her urgent news.
Jehovah’s angel has just appeared to him in
a dream, telling him: “Get up, take the young
child and his mother and ?ee to Egypt, and stay
there until I give you word, for Herod is about
to search for the young child to kill him.”—Matthew 2:13.
Right away, Joseph, Mary, and their son make
their escape by night. They do so just in time,
because Herod learns that the astrologers have
tricked him. He had told them to report back to
him. Instead, they left the country without doing so. Herod is ?lled with rage. Still wanting
to kill Jesus, he gives orders to put to death
all the boys in Bethlehem and its surroundings
who are two years of age and under. He bases
this age calculation on what he learned earlier
from the astrologers who had come from the
East.
The slaughter of all the boys is a horrible
thing! We cannot know how many young boys
were killed, but the bitter weeping and wailing of the bereaved mothers ful?lls a Bible
prophecy given by Jeremiah, God’s prophet.
—Jeremiah 31:15.
In the meantime, Joseph and his family have
?ed to Egypt, and they continue living there.
Then one night Jehovah’s angel again appears
to Joseph in a dream. “Get up, take the young
child and his mother,” the angel says, “and go
into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the life of the young child are dead.” (Matthew 2:20) So Joseph now concludes that the
family can return to their homeland. In this way
another Bible prophecy is ful?lled—God’s Son is
called out of Egypt.—Hosea 11:1.
Apparently, Joseph intends that his family
24

?

settle in Judea, perhaps near the town of Bethlehem, where they were living before they ?ed
to Egypt. But he learns that Herod’s wicked son
Archelaus is now the king of Judea. In another
dream, God warns Joseph of the danger. So Joseph and his family travel farther north and set-

? JESUS’ FAMILY FLEES TO EGYPT
JOSEPH MOVES HIS FAMILY TO NAZARETH

8

tle in the city of Nazareth in the territory of Galilee, away from the center of Jewish religious
life. Jesus grows up in this community, which
ful?lls another prophecy: “He will be called a
Nazarene.”—Matthew 2:23.

 When the astrologers do not return, what does King Herod do, and how is young Jesus protected?
 On returning from Egypt, why do Joseph and his family not go back to Bethlehem?
 What Bible prophecies are ful?lled during this period of time?
25

GROWING UP IN NAZARETH
MATTHEW 13:55, 56 MARK 6:3

Jesus is growing up in Nazareth, a rather small,
unimportant city. It is located up north, in the
hill country of an area called Galilee, to the west
of the large lake known as the Sea of Galilee.
When he is perhaps two years of age, Jesus is brought here from Egypt by Joseph and
Mary. It seems that at this time, he is their only
child. Later, however, his half brothers are born
—James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas. Joseph
and Mary also become parents to girls, Jesus’
half sisters. Yes, Jesus has at least six younger
brothers and sisters.
Of course, Jesus has other relatives. We already know about Elizabeth and her son, John.

26

He lives many miles to the south, in Judea. Living close by in Galilee is Salome, who is apparently Mary’s sister and thus Jesus’ aunt. Salome’s husband is Zebedee. Their two sons,
James and John, would seem to be Jesus’ ?rst
cousins. We do not know whether Jesus spends
much time with these boys while they are growing up, but eventually they become his close
companions, serving as two of Jesus’ apostles.
Joseph has to work very hard to support his
growing family. He is a carpenter. Joseph raises Jesus as his own son, so Jesus is called
“the carpenter’s son.” (Matthew 13:55) Joseph
teaches Jesus to be a carpenter too, and he

?

learns well. In fact, people later say about Jesus: “This is the carpenter.”—Mark 6:3.
The life of Joseph’s family is centered on
the worship of Jehovah. In keeping with God’s
Law, Joseph and Mary give their children spiritual instruction ‘when they sit in their house
and when they walk on the road and when they
lie down and when they get up.’ (Deuterono-

9

my 6:6-9) There is a synagogue in Nazareth.
We can be sure that Joseph regularly takes
his family along to worship there. It is later
said that “according to his custom on the Sabbath day,” Jesus went to the synagogue. (Luke
4:16) The family also ?nds great enjoyment
in regular trips to Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem.

 Jesus has at least how many younger brothers and sisters?
 What secular work does Jesus learn to do, and why?
 Joseph provides what vital instruction for his family?

JOSEPH AND MARY’S FAMILY GROWS
? JESUS LEARNS A TRADE

JESUS’ FAMILY TRAVELS TO JERUSALEM
LUKE 2:40-52

It is springtime. Thus, it is the time for Joseph’s
family, along with friends and relatives, to make
their yearly trip to Jerusalem. They go there
to celebrate the Passover, as the Law directs.
(Deuteronomy 16:16) From Nazareth down to
Jerusalem is a trip of about 75 miles. It is a busy
and exciting time for all. Jesus, now 12 years
old, is looking forward with special interest to
the festival and the opportunity to be near the
temple again.
To Jesus and his family, the Passover is not
just a one-day event. The day after the Passover
is the beginning of the seven-day Festival of
Unleavened Bread. (Mark 14:1) It is considered
part of the Passover season. The trip from their
home in Nazareth, the stay in Jerusalem, and
the return to their home takes about two weeks.
But this year, because of an incident that involves Jesus, it takes a bit longer. That has to
do with a problem that is discovered on the return trip from Jerusalem.
While they are traveling, Joseph and Mary assume that Jesus is among the group of relatives
and friends traveling northward together. However, when they stop for the night, they do not
?nd him. So they go looking for him among their

companions, but he is not there. Their boy is nowhere to be found! Joseph and Mary then head
back to Jerusalem to look for him.
For a whole day, they search without ?nding
him. Nor do they ?nd him on the second day.
Finally, on the third day, they locate their son in
the temple, with its many halls. They see Jesus
sitting in the midst of some Jewish teachers.
He is listening, asking questions, and amazing
them with his understanding.
“Child, why did you treat us this way?” Mary
asks. “Here your father and I have been frantically looking for you.”—Luke 2:48.
Jesus expresses surprise that they did not
know where he would be. “Why were you looking for me?” he asks. “Did you not know that I
must be in the house of my Father?”—Luke 2:49.
Now that they are reunited, Jesus returns
home to Nazareth with Joseph and Mary and
continues subject to them. He goes on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth.
Though still young, he has the favor of God
and men. Yes, from his childhood on, Jesus
sets a ?ne example not only in seeking spiritual interests but also in showing respect to his
parents.

JOYFUL TRIPS Trips to Jerusalem for the three annual festivals were

joyful events for all. (Deuteronomy 16:15) During those travels, Jesus
would see di?erent parts of the land, learn about its geography, and
meet fellow worshippers from other regions. What memorable trips
to make!

?

TWELVE-YEAR-OLD JESUS QUESTIONS TEACHERS
? JESUS REFERS TO JEHOVAH AS “MY FATHER”

10

 What springtime trip does Jesus regularly make with his family, and why?
 When Jesus is 12 years old, what do Joseph and Mary realize while returning from Jerusalem,
leading to what discovery?
 Jesus set what good example for youths today?
29

JOHN THE BAPTIST PREPARES THE WAY
MATTHEW 3:1-12 MARK 1:1-8 LUKE 3:1-18 JOHN 1:6-8, 15-28

Some 17 years have passed since Jesus at 12
years of age was questioning the teachers in
the temple. It is now the spring of 29 C.E. Many
are talking about Jesus’ relative John, who is
preaching in all the country on the eastern side
of the Jordan River.
John is quite an impressive man, both in appearance and in speech. His clothing is made of
camel’s hair, and he wears a leather belt around
his waist. He eats locusts—a type of grasshopper—and wild honey. What is his message? “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn
near.”—Matthew 3:2.
John’s message excites those who have come
out to hear him. Many realize their need to repent, that is, to change their attitude and ways,
rejecting their past course of life as undesirable. Those who come to him are from “Jerusalem and all Judea and all the country around
the Jordan.” (Matthew 3:5) Many of those who
come out to John do repent. He baptizes them,
immersing them in the waters of the Jordan.
Why?
He baptizes people in symbol, or acknowledgment, of their heartfelt repentance for sins
against God’s Law covenant. (Acts 19:4) Not
all qualify, though. When some religious leaders, Pharisees and Sadducees, come to him,
John calls them “o?spring of vipers.” He says:
“Produce fruit that be?ts repentance. Do not
presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God
is able to raise up children for Abraham from
these stones. The ax is already lying at the root
of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce ?ne fruit is to be cut down and thrown into
the ?re.”—Matthew 3:7-10.
30

Because John is receiving much attention,
has a powerful message, and is baptizing many,
the priests and Levites are sent out to ask him:
“Who are you?”
“I am not the Christ,” John confesses.
“What, then? Are you Elijah?” they inquire.
He answers: “I am not.”
“Are you the Prophet?” they ask, meaning
the great Prophet who Moses said would come.
—Deuteronomy 18:15, 18.
“No!” John replies.
They become insistent: “Who are you? Tell us
so that we may give an answer to those who
sent us. What do you say about yourself?” John
says: “I am a voice of someone crying out in the
wilderness, ‘Make the way of Jehovah straight,’
just as Isaiah the prophet said.”—John 1:19-23.
“Why, then, do you baptize,” they want to
know, “if you are not the Christ or Elijah or
the Prophet?” He gives a meaningful answer: “I
baptize in water. One is standing among you
whom you do not know, the one coming behind
me.”—John 1:25-27.
Yes, John acknowledges that he is preparing the way by getting people in a proper heart
condition to accept the foretold Messiah, the
one who is to become King. Of him, John says:
“The one coming after me is stronger than I
am, whose sandals I am not worthy to take o?.”
(Matthew 3:11) In fact, John even says: “The
one coming behind me has advanced in front of
me, for he existed before me.”—John 1:15.
Thus, John’s message “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near” is indeed
appropriate. (Matthew 3:2) It serves as a public notice that the ministry of Jehovah’s coming
King, Jesus Christ, is about to begin.

?

JOHN COMES PREACHING AND BAPTIZING
? MANY GET BAPTIZED, BUT NOT ALL

11

 What sort of man is John, and what is he doing?
 Why does John baptize people?
 What is John’s message, and why is it appropriate?
31

S E CT I O N

2
THE BEGINNING
OF JESUS’
MINISTRY

‘SEE, THE LAMB
OF GOD WHO
TAKES AWAY SIN.’
—JOHN 1:29

JESUS GETS BAPTIZED
MATTHEW 3:13-17 MARK 1:9-11 LUKE 3:21, 22 JOHN 1:32-34

Some six months after John the Baptist begins
preaching, Jesus, who is now about 30 years
old, comes to him at the Jordan River. For what
reason? It is not merely to pay a friendly visit.
Nor does Jesus simply want to see how John’s
work is progressing. No, Jesus comes to ask
John to baptize him.
Understandably, John objects: “I am the one
who needs to be baptized by you, and are you
coming to me?” (Matthew 3:14) John knows
that Jesus is God’s special Son. Recall that
while still in his mother’s womb, John had
jumped with gladness when Mary, pregnant
with Jesus, visited John’s mother, Elizabeth. No
doubt John’s mother later told him about this.
And he would also have learned about the angel’s announcement of Jesus’ birth and about
the angels who appeared to the shepherds on
the night Jesus was born.
John understands that the baptism he is performing is for those repenting of their sins. Yet
Jesus is without sin. Despite John’s objection,
Jesus insists: “Let it be this time, for in that way

34

it is suitable for us to carry out all that is righteous.”—Matthew 3:15.
Why is it suitable for Jesus to be baptized?
Jesus is not being baptized in symbol of repentance for sins. His baptism shows that he is presenting himself to do the will of his Father. (Hebrews 10:5-7) Jesus has been a carpenter, but
now it is time for him to begin the ministry that
his heavenly Father sent him to earth to perform. Do you think that John expects anything
unusual to happen when he baptizes Jesus?
Well, John later reports: “The very One who
sent me to baptize in water said to me: ‘Whoever it is upon whom you see the spirit coming down and remaining, this is the one who
baptizes in holy spirit.’ ” (John 1:33) So John is
expecting God’s spirit to come upon someone
he baptizes. Accordingly, once Jesus comes up
from the water, John may not be surprised to
see “God’s spirit descending like a dove and
coming upon [Jesus].”—Matthew 3:16.
But more than that happens at Jesus’ baptism. ‘The heavens are opened up’ to him. What

?

does this mean? Likely it means that at the time
of Jesus’ baptism, the memory of his prehuman
life in heaven returns to him. Thus, Jesus now
recalls his life as a spirit son of Jehovah, including truths that God taught him in heaven before
he came to earth.
In addition, at Jesus’ baptism a voice from
heaven proclaims: “This is my Son, the beloved,
whom I have approved.” (Matthew 3:17) Whose
voice is that? It cannot be Jesus’ own voice;
he is right there with John. That voice is God’s.
Clearly, Jesus is God’s Son. He is not God himself.
It is noteworthy that Jesus is a human son
of God, even as was the ?rst man, Adam. The
disciple Luke, after describing Jesus’ baptism,
writes: “When Jesus began his work, he was
about 30 years old, being the son, as the opinion was, of Joseph, son of Heli, . . . son of David, . . . son of Abraham, . . . son of Noah, . . .
son of Adam, son of God.”—Luke 3:23-38.
Just as Adam was a human “son of God,” so is
Jesus. At his baptism, Jesus enters into a new
relationship with God, becoming God’s spiritual Son. Thus, Jesus is in a position to teach divine truth and to show the way to life. Jesus is
starting on a course that will in time lead to his
laying down his human life in sacri?ce in behalf
of sinful humankind.

 Why is Jesus no stranger to John?
 Jesus has committed no sins, so why is
he baptized by John?
 Why might John not be surprised that God’s
spirit comes upon Jesus?

? JESUS IS BAPTIZED AND ANOINTED
JEHOVAH DECLARES JESUS TO BE HIS SON

12

LEARN FROM THE WAY JESUS FACED TEMPTATIONS
MATTHEW 4:1-11 MARK 1:12, 13 LUKE 4:1-13

Right after Jesus is baptized by John, God’s
spirit leads Jesus into the Judean wilderness.
He has a lot to think about. At Jesus’ baptism,
“the heavens were opened up.” (Matthew 3:16)
He thus can recall things he learned and did in
heaven. Indeed, there is much for him to meditate on!
Jesus spends 40 days and 40 nights in the
wilderness. During that time, he eats nothing.
Then, when Jesus is very hungry, Satan the
Devil approaches to tempt him, saying: “If you
are a son of God, tell these stones to become
loaves of bread.” (Matthew 4:3) Knowing that it
is wrong to use his miraculous powers to satisfy his personal desires, Jesus rejects that temptation.
The Devil does not stop there. He tries another approach. He challenges Jesus to throw himself o? the temple battlement. But Jesus is not
tempted to make such a spectacular display.
Quoting from the Scriptures, Jesus shows that
it is wrong to put God to the test in such a way.
Then, in a third temptation, the Devil in some
way shows Jesus “all the kingdoms of the world
and their glory” and says: “All these things I will
give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me.” Again Jesus ?atly refuses, saying:

“Go away, Satan!” (Matthew 4:8-10) He does
not yield to temptation to do wrong, knowing
that sacred service must be rendered only to
Jehovah. Yes, he chooses to remain faithful to
God.
We can learn from these temptations and
from Jesus’ response to them. The temptations
were real, which shows that the Devil is not a
mere quality of evil as some people claim. He is
a real, invisible person. This account also shows
that the world’s governments actually are the
Devil’s property; he controls them. How else
could his o?ering them to Christ have been a
real temptation?
Furthermore, the Devil said that he was willing to reward Jesus for one act of worship, to
the extent of giving Jesus all the kingdoms of
the world. The Devil may well try to tempt us in
a similar way, perhaps placing before us tantalizing opportunities to obtain worldly wealth,
power, or position. How wise we prove to be
when we follow Jesus’ example by remaining
faithful to God whatever the temptation is! But
recall that the Devil left Jesus only “until another convenient time.” (Luke 4:13) It may be
similar with us, so we must not let our guard
down.

 What things might Jesus meditate on during his 40 days in the wilderness?
 In what ways does the Devil try to tempt Jesus?
 What can we learn from the temptations and from Jesus’ response to them?
36

?

SATAN TEMPTS JESUS

13

JESUS BEGINS TO MAKE DISCIPLES
JOHN 1:29-51

After 40 days in the wilderness and before
heading back to Galilee, Jesus returns to John,
who had baptized him. As Jesus approaches,
John points him out and exclaims to those present: “See, the Lamb of God who takes away the
sin of the world! This is the one about whom I
said: ‘Behind me there comes a man who has
advanced in front of me, for he existed before
me.’ ” (John 1:29, 30) Though John is a bit older than Jesus, he is aware that Jesus existed
before him as a spirit person in heaven.
A few weeks earlier, when Jesus came to be
baptized, John did not seem certain that Jesus
was to be the Messiah. “Even I did not know
him,” John acknowledges, “but the reason why
I came baptizing in water was so that he might
be made manifest to Israel.”—John 1:31.
John goes on to relate to his listeners what
happened when he baptized Jesus: “I viewed
the spirit coming down as a dove out of heaven, and it remained upon him. Even I did not
know him, but the very One who sent me to baptize in water said to me: ‘Whoever it is upon
whom you see the spirit coming down and remaining, this is the one who baptizes in holy
spirit.’ And I have seen it, and I have given witness that this one is the Son of God.”—John 1:
32-34.
John is with two of his disciples the next day
when Jesus again approaches. John says: “See,
the Lamb of God!” (John 1:36) At this, these two
disciples of John the Baptist follow Jesus. One
of the two is named Andrew. Likely the other is
the very person who recorded this event, who is
also named John. It seems that this John is a
cousin of Jesus, being a son of Salome. She
is probably Mary’s sister, and her husband is
Zebedee.
38

Turning and seeing Andrew and John following him, Jesus asks: “What are you looking
for?”
“Rabbi,” they ask him, “where are you staying?”
“Come, and you will see,” answers Jesus.
—John 1:37-39.
It is about four o’clock in the afternoon, and
Andrew and John stay with Jesus the rest of
the day. Andrew is so excited that at one point
he ?nds his brother Simon, also called Peter,
and tells him: “We have found the Messiah.”
(John 1:41) Andrew takes Peter to Jesus. Later events suggest that John similarly ?nds his
brother James and brings him to Jesus; yet,
John does not include this personal detail in his
record of events.
The next day, Jesus ?nds Philip, who is from
Bethsaida. It is near the north shore of the Sea

?

of Galilee and is the home city of Andrew and
Peter. Jesus invites Philip: “Be my follower.”
—John 1:43.
Philip then ?nds Nathanael, also called Bartholomew, and says: “We have found the one
of whom Moses, in the Law, and the Prophets
wrote: Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazareth.” Nathanael is doubtful and says to Philip:
“Can anything good come out of Nazareth?”
“Come and see,” Philip urges him. Jesus notices Nathanael approaching and says: “See,
truly an Israelite in whom there is no deceit.”
“How do you know me?” Nathanael asks.
Jesus answers: “Before Philip called you,
while you were under the ?g tree, I saw you.”
Nathanael replies in amazement: “Rabbi, you
are the Son of God, you are King of Israel.”
“Do you believe because I told you I saw you
under the ?g tree?” Jesus asks. “You will see

JESUS’ FIRST DISCIPLES JOIN HIM

14

things greater than these.” Then Jesus promises: “Most truly I say to you men, you will see
heaven opened up and the angels of God ascending and descending to the Son of man.”
—John 1:45-51.
Very soon after this, Jesus, along with his
newly acquired disciples, leaves the Jordan Valley and travels to Galilee.

 Who are the ?rst of Jesus’ disciples?
 How is Peter, as well as perhaps James,
introduced to Jesus?
 What helps to convince Nathanael that
Jesus is the Son of God?
39

PERFORMING HIS FIRST MIRACLE
JOHN 2:1-12

?

It is now the third day since Nathanael has
become one of Jesus’ earliest disciples. Jesus
and at least some of those early disciples head
north to the district of Galilee, their home area.
Their destination is the town of Cana, the hometown of Nathanael. Cana is located in the hills
north of Nazareth, where Jesus himself grew
up. They have been invited to a wedding feast
in Cana.
Jesus’ mother has also come to the wedding.
As a friend of the family of those getting married, Mary seems to have been involved in helping to care for the many guests. So she is quick
to note a shortage, which she reports to Jesus:
“They have no wine.”—John 2:3.
In e?ect, Mary is suggesting that Jesus do
something about the lack of wine. Using an
idiom that indicates his objection, Jesus replies: “Woman, why is that of concern to me and
to you?” (John 2:4) As God’s appointed King,
Jesus is to have his activities directed by his
heavenly Father, not by family or friends. Mary
wisely leaves the matter in her son’s hands, simply saying to those ministering: “Do whatever
he tells you.”—John 2:5.
There are six stone water jars, each of which
can hold more than ten gallons. Jesus instructs
the attendants: “Fill the jars with water.” Then
Jesus says: “Now draw some out and take it to
the director of the feast.”—John 2:7, 8.
The director is impressed by the ?ne quali-

? THE WEDDING IN CANA
JESUS TURNS WATER INTO WINE

15

ty of the wine but is unaware that it has been
miraculously produced. Calling the bridegroom,
he says: “Everyone else puts out the ?ne wine
?rst, and when people are intoxicated, the inferior. You have saved the ?ne wine until now.”
—John 2:10.
This is the ?rst miracle that Jesus performs.
When his new disciples see this miracle, their
faith in him is strengthened. Afterward, Jesus,
his mother, and his half brothers travel to the
city of Capernaum on the northwest shore of
the Sea of Galilee.

 When during Jesus’ ministry does the wedding in Cana occur?
 How does Jesus respond to his mother’s suggestion about the wine?
 Jesus performs what miracle, and how does that a?ect others?
41

JESUS SHOWS ZEAL FOR TRUE WORSHIP
JOHN 2:12-22

?

After the wedding in Cana, Jesus heads to Capernaum. Jesus’ mother and his half brothers
—James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas—are traveling with him.
But why does Jesus go to Capernaum? This
city is more prominently situated than Nazareth
or Cana and is evidently larger. Also, many of
Jesus’ newly acquired disciples live in or near
Capernaum. So Jesus can provide them with
some training in their home area.
During his stay in Capernaum, Jesus also
performs marvelous works. Thus many people
of the city and in the surrounding area hear
about the things he does there. But Jesus and
his companions, who are devoted Jewish men,
must soon be on their way to Jerusalem to attend the Passover of 30 C.E.
While at the temple in Jerusalem, Jesus’ disciples see something about Jesus that is most
impressive, di?erent from what they have seen
before.
God’s Law calls upon Israelites to make animal sacri?ces at the temple, and visitors need
food provisions during their stay. So the Law allows for those traveling to Jerusalem from a
distant location to bring money to spend on

JESUS CLEANSES THE TEMPLE

16

“cattle, sheep, goats,” and other things useful
during their stay in the city. (Deuteronomy 14:
24-26) As a result, merchants in Jerusalem sell
animals or birds right inside a large courtyard
of the temple. And some of them are cheating
the people by charging too much.
Filled with indignation, Jesus pours out the
coins of the money changers, overturns their
tables, and drives the men out. Jesus then says:
“Take these things away from here! Stop making the house of my Father a house of commerce!”—John 2:16.
When Jesus’ disciples see this, they remember the prophecy about God’s Son: “The zeal for
your house will consume me.” But the Jews ask:
“What sign can you show us, since you are doing these things?” Jesus answers: “Tear down
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
—John 2:17-19; Psalm 69:9.
The Jews assume that Jesus means the literal temple there in Jerusalem, so they ask: “This
temple was built in 46 years, and will you raise
it up in three days?” (John 2:20) However, Jesus is referring to his body as a temple. Three
years later, his disciples remember these words
when he is resurrected.

 After the wedding in Cana, Jesus travels to what places?
 Why is Jesus angry over what he sees at the temple, and what does he do?
 To what does Jesus refer as “this temple,” and what does he mean?
43

HE TEACHES NICODEMUS AT NIGHT
JOHN 2:23–3:21

While he is in Jerusalem for the Passover of
30 C.E., Jesus performs remarkable signs, or
miracles. As a result, many people put faith in
him. Nicodemus, a Pharisee and a member of
the Jewish high court called the Sanhedrin, is
impressed. Wanting to learn more, he visits Jesus after dark, probably because he fears that
his reputation with the other Jewish leaders will
be damaged if he is seen.
“Rabbi,” Nicodemus says, “we know that you
have come from God as a teacher, for no one
can perform these signs that you perform unless God is with him.” In reply, Jesus tells Nicodemus that in order to enter the Kingdom of
God, a person must be “born again.”—John 3:
2, 3.
How, though, can a person be born again?
“He cannot enter into the womb of his mother
a second time and be born, can he?” Nicodemus asks.—John 3:4.
No, that is not what being born again means.
Jesus explains: “Unless anyone is born from
water and spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.” (John 3:5) When Jesus was baptized and holy spirit descended upon him, he
was thus born “from water and spirit.” At that
time, there was an accompanying declaration
from heaven: “This is my Son, the beloved,
whom I have approved.” (Matthew 3:16, 17) In
this way, God announced that he had brought
forth Jesus as a spiritual son having the prospect of entering into the heavenly Kingdom.
Later, at Pentecost 33 C.E., holy spirit will be
poured out on other baptized ones, and they
will thus be born again as spiritual sons of God.
—Acts 2:1-4.
It is di?cult for Nicodemus to understand
what Jesus is teaching him about the King44

dom. So Jesus gives further information regarding his special role as
God’s human Son. Jesus
says: “Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so the Son of
man must be lifted up, so
that everyone believing in
him may have everlasting life.”—John 3:14, 15.
Long ago those Israelites who were bitten by
poisonous snakes had to look at the copper
serpent to be saved. (Numbers 21:9) Similarly,
all humans need to exercise faith in God’s Son
to be saved from their dying condition and to
gain everlasting life. Stressing Jehovah’s loving
role in this, Jesus next tells Nicodemus: “God
loved the world so much that he gave his onlybegotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith
in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) Hence, here in Jerusalem some six months after beginning his ministry, Jesus makes clear that he is the way to
salvation for mankind.
Jesus tells Nicodemus: “God did not send
his Son into the world for him to judge the
world.” This means that he was not sent to
judge it adversely, condemning all humans to
destruction. Rather, as Jesus says, he was sent
“for the world to be saved through him.”—John
3:17.
Nicodemus has fearfully come to Jesus under
cover of darkness. So it is interesting that Jesus closes his conversation with him by saying:
“Now this is the basis for judgment: that the
light [which Jesus is by his life and teachings]
has come into the world, but men have loved the
darkness rather than the light, for their works

?

were wicked. For whoever practices vile things
hates the light and does not come to the light,
so that his works may not be reproved. But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so
that his works may be made manifest as hav-

? JESUS TALKS WITH NICODEMUS
WHAT IT MEANS TO BE “BORN AGAIN”

17

ing been done in harmony with God.”—John 3:
19-21.
Now it is up to this Pharisee and teacher of
Israel, Nicodemus, to re?ect on what he has just
heard about Jesus’ role in God’s purpose.

 What prompts Nicodemus to visit Jesus, and why at night?
 What does it mean to be “born again”?
 In what sense has Jesus not come “to judge the world”?
45

JESUS INCREASES AS JOHN DECREASES
MATTHEW 4:12 MARK 6:17-20 LUKE 3:19, 20 JOHN 3:22–4:3

After celebrating the Passover in the spring of
30 C.E., Jesus and his disciples leave Jerusalem. However, they do not directly return to
their homes in Galilee. They go into the country
of Judea, where they baptize many. John the
Baptist has been doing a similar work for about
a year, and some of his disciples are still with
him, perhaps in the Jordan River valley.
Jesus himself does not baptize anyone—his
disciples do so under his direction. At this
point in Jesus’ ministry, both Jesus and John
are teaching Jews who are repentant over
their sins against God’s Law covenant.—Acts
19:4.
But John’s disciples are jealous, complaining
to him about Jesus: “The man [Jesus] who was
with you . . . is baptizing, and all are going to
him.” (John 3:26) Yet, John is not jealous. He rejoices in Jesus’ success and wants his disciples
to rejoice too. John reminds them: “You yourselves bear me witness that I said, ‘I am not the
Christ, but I have been sent ahead of that one.’ ”
He illustrates this point in a way that all can understand: “Whoever has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, when
he stands and hears him, has a great deal of
joy on account of the voice of the bridegroom.
So my joy has been made complete.”—John 3:
28, 29.

46

John, like the friend of the bridegroom, rejoiced months earlier upon introducing his disciples to Jesus. Some of them followed Jesus
and would in time be anointed with holy spirit.
John also wants his present disciples to follow
Jesus. In fact, John’s purpose is to prepare the
way for Christ’s ministry. John explains: “That
one must keep on increasing, but I must keep
on decreasing.”—John 3:30.
A di?erent John, who had earlier begun to
follow Jesus, later writes concerning Jesus’
origin and key role in human salvation: “The one
who comes from above is over all others. . . . The
Father loves the Son and has given all things
into his hand. The one who exercises faith in the
Son has everlasting life; the one who disobeys
the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God
remains upon him.” (John 3:31, 35, 36) What an
important truth for people to know!
Not long after John the Baptist discusses that his role and work must decrease, he
is arrested by King Herod. Herod has taken Herodias, the wife of his half brother Philip, and married her. When John publicly exposes his adulterous deed, Herod has him put in
prison. Upon hearing about John’s being arrested, Jesus leaves Judea with his disciples and
‘withdraws into Galilee.’—Matthew 4:12; Mark
1:14.

?

? JESUS’ DISCIPLES BAPTIZE
JOHN THE BAPTIST IS IMPRISONED

18

 What is the meaning of the baptism done by John? the baptism done under Jesus’ direction
prior to his resurrection?
 How does John show that his disciples should not be jealous of Jesus’ activity?
 Why is John put in prison?
47

TEACHING A SAMARITAN WOMAN
JOHN 4:3- 43

On their way from Judea to Galilee, Jesus and
his disciples travel north through the district of
Samaria. They are tired from the journey. About
noon they stop near the city of Sychar to rest
by a well that Jacob likely dug or paid to have
dug centuries earlier. Down to our time, such a
well can be found near the modern-day city of
Nablus.
While Jesus rests near the well, his disciples go into the nearby city to buy some food.
In their absence, a Samaritan woman comes
to draw water. Jesus says to her: “Give me a
drink.”—John 4:7.
Jews and Samaritans generally have no dealings with one another because of deep-seated
prejudices. So the woman is astonished and
asks: “How is it that you, despite being a Jew,
ask me for a drink even though I am a Samaritan woman?” Jesus answers: “If you had known
of the free gift of God and who it is who says to
you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked
him, and he would have given you living water.”
“Sir,” she replies, “you do not even have a bucket for drawing water, and the well is deep. From
what source, then, do you have this living water? You are not greater than our forefather Jacob, who gave us the well and who together with
his sons and his cattle drank out of it, are you?”
—John 4:9-12.
“Everyone drinking from this water will get
thirsty again,” Jesus declares. “Whoever drinks
from the water that I will give him will never get thirsty at all, but the water that I will
give him will become in him a spring of water
bubbling up to impart everlasting life.” (John
4:13, 14) Yes, though tired, Jesus is willing to
share life-giving words of truth with the Samaritan woman.
48

The woman then says: “Sir, give me this water, so that I may neither thirst nor keep coming
over to this place to draw water.” Jesus now
seems to change the subject and says to her:
“Go, call your husband and come to this place.”
She replies: “I do not have a husband.” But how
shocked she must be at what Jesus knows when
he tells her: “You are right in saying, ‘I do not
have a husband.’ For you have had ?ve husbands, and the man you now have is not your
husband.”—John 4:15-18.
The signi?cance of his statement is clear to
her, and she says in amazement: “Sir, I see that
you are a prophet.” She then shows that she has
an interest in spiritual things. How? She continues: “Our forefathers [the Samaritans] worshipped on this mountain [Mt. Gerizim, which is
close by], but you people [the Jews] say that in
Jerusalem is the place where people must worship.”—John 4:19, 20.
However, Jesus explains that the place of
worship is not important. He says: “The hour
is coming when neither on this mountain nor
in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.” Then
he tells her: “The hour is coming, and it is
now, when the true worshippers will worship the

?

JESUS TEACHES A SAMARITAN WOMAN AND OTHERS
? WORSHIP THAT GOD APPROVES

19

 Why is the Samaritan woman surprised that Jesus speaks to her?
 What does Jesus teach the woman about living water and where to worship God?
 How does Jesus reveal to the Samaritan woman who he is, and what kind of worship does he encourage?
49

WHO WERE THE SAMARITANS? The region

called Samaria lay between Judea to the south
and Galilee to the north. After King Solomon’s
death, the ten northern tribes of Israel broke
away from the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.
The people of those ten tribes turned to calf
worship. So in 740 B.C.E., Jehovah allowed
the Assyrians to overrun Samaria. The invaders carried o? much of the population, replacing them with people from elsewhere in the
Assyrian Empire. These worshippers of foreign gods intermarried with Israelites who remained in the land. Over time, people of this
area developed a form of worship that incorporated some of the beliefs and practices set
out in God’s Law, such as circumcision. Still,
their religious practices could not be called
true worship.—2 Kings 17:9-33; Isaiah 9:9.
In Jesus’ day, the Samaritans accepted the
books of Moses but did not worship at the
temple in Jerusalem. For years they had used
a temple built on Mount Gerizim, not far
from Sychar, and they continued worshipping
on that mountain even after that temple was
destroyed. The animosity between the Samaritans and the Jews was evident during Jesus’
ministry.—John 8:48.

Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship
him.”—John 4:21, 23, 24.
What the Father looks for in true worshippers
is not where they worship but how they worship.
The woman is impressed. “I know that Messiah is coming, who is called Christ,” she says.
“Whenever that one comes, he will declare all
things to us openly.”—John 4:25.
Then Jesus reveals an important truth: “I am
he, the one speaking to you.” (John 4:26) Think
of that! Here is a woman who comes at midday
to draw water. Yet, Jesus favors her in a wonderful way. He tells her pointedly what he has
apparently not yet confessed openly to others
—that he is the Messiah.
MANY SAMARITANS BELIEVE

Jesus’ disciples return from Sychar with food.
They ?nd him at Jacob’s well where they left
him, but now he is talking with a Samaritan
woman. As the disciples arrive, she leaves her
water jar and heads for the city.
Once in Sychar, the woman recounts to the
people the things that Jesus told her. With conviction, she tells them: “Come and see a man
who told me everything I did.” Then, perhaps to
arouse curiosity, she asks: “Could this not perhaps be the Christ?” (John 4:29) That is a question on a vital subject—one that has been of interest since Moses’ day. (Deuteronomy 18:18) It
moves the people of the city to come out to see
Jesus for themselves.
Meanwhile, the disciples urge Jesus to eat
the food they have brought. But he replies:
“I have food to eat that you do not know about.”
The disciples wonder at that, saying to one another: “No one brought him anything to eat, did
he?” Jesus kindly explains with words that hold
meaning for all of his followers: “My food is to
do the will of him who sent me and to ?nish his
work.”—John 4:32-34.

The work Jesus is talking about is not that of
the grain harvest, which is some four months
away. Rather, Jesus is referring to a spiritual
harvest, as he goes on to show: “Lift up your
eyes and view the ?elds, that they are white
for harvesting. Already the reaper is receiving
wages and gathering fruit for everlasting life, so
that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.”—John 4:35, 36.
Jesus may already realize the e?ect of his encounter with the Samaritan woman. Many from
Sychar are putting faith in him on account of
her testimony, for she is telling the people: “He
told me all the things I did.” (John 4:39) Therefore, when they come from Sychar to the well,
they ask Jesus to stay and talk to them some
more. Jesus accepts the invitation and remains
in Samaria for two days.

As the Samaritans listen to Jesus, many more
believe in him. They tell the woman: “We no longer believe just because of what you said; for
we have heard for ourselves, and we know that
this man really is the savior of the world.” (John
4:42) Surely the Samaritan woman provides
a ?ne example of how we can witness about
Christ, arousing curiosity so that our listeners
will welcome more information.
Recall that it is four months before the harvest—evidently the barley harvest, which in this
region occurs in the spring. So it is now probably November or December. This means that
following the Passover of 30 C.E., Jesus and
his disciples have spent eight months or so in
Judea, teaching and baptizing. They now head
north to their home territory of Galilee. What
awaits them there?

 What conclusion about Jesus does the Samaritan woman reach, and what does she then do?
 What have Jesus and his disciples been doing following the Passover of 30 C.E.?

51

S E CT I O N

3
JESUS’
GREAT MINISTRY
IN GALILEE

‘JESUS BEGAN
PREACHING:
“THE KINGDOM HAS
DRAWN NEAR.” ’
—MATTHEW 4:17

SECOND MIRACLE WHILE IN CANA
MARK 1:14, 15 LUKE 4:14, 15 JOHN 4:43-54

After some two days in Samaria, Jesus moves
on to his home territory. He has had an extended preaching campaign in Judea, but he is
not returning to Galilee to rest. Rather, he begins an even greater ministry in the land where
he grew up. He might not expect to be wellreceived there, because as Jesus stated, “a
prophet has no honor in his own homeland.”
(John 4:44) Instead of staying with him, his disciples return home to their families and their
former occupations.
What message does Jesus begin preaching?
It is this: “The Kingdom of God has drawn near.
Repent, and have faith in the good news.” (Mark
1:15) And what is the response? Actually, many
Galileans receive Jesus well, giving him honor.
This is not just because of his message. Some
from Galilee were at the Passover in Jerusalem
months before and saw the remarkable signs
Jesus performed.—John 2:23.
Where does Jesus begin his great Galilean ministry? Apparently in Cana, where he had
once turned water into wine at a wedding feast.
While there on this second occasion, Jesus
learns of a lad who is very sick, at the point of
death. He is the son of a government o?cial of
Herod Antipas, the king who later has John the
Baptist beheaded. This o?cial hears that Jesus
has come out of Judea to Cana. So the man

travels from his home in Capernaum to Cana to
?nd Jesus. The grief-stricken o?cial urges him:
“Lord, come down before my young child dies.”
—John 4:49.
Jesus responds with a statement that must
astonish the man: “Go your way; your son lives.”
(John 4:50) Herod’s o?cial believes Jesus and
starts his return trip home. On the way he is met
by his slaves, who have hurried to tell him good
news. Yes, his son is alive and well! ‘When did
he get better?’ he asks, trying to put the pieces
together.
“The fever left him yesterday at the seventh
hour,” they answer.—John 4:52.
The o?cial realizes that this is exactly when
Jesus said, “Your son lives.” After that, both this
man, who is wealthy enough to have slaves, and
his entire household become disciples of Christ.
Cana is thus a place where Jesus twice performs miracles, turning water into wine and later curing the young boy from a distance of
some 16 miles. These, of course, are not his
only miracles. But this cure is signi?cant because it marks his return to Galilee. He is clearly a prophet approved by God, yet to what extent will this ‘prophet be honored in his own
homeland’?
That will become evident as Jesus heads
home to Nazareth. What awaits him there?

 When Jesus returns to Galilee, what message does he begin to preach and what
response does he encounter?
 Jesus performs what miracle while again in Cana, and how does it a?ect those involved?
 What is noteworthy about the way Jesus cured a lad in Capernaum?
54

?

JESUS PREACHES THAT “THE KINGDOM OF GOD HAS DRAWN NEAR”
? HE HEALS A BOY FROM A DISTANCE

20

AT THE SYNAGOGUE IN NAZARETH
LUKE 4:16-31

There is no doubt a stir of excitement in Nazareth. Before he left to be baptized by John a little over a year ago, Jesus was a carpenter here.
But now he is known as a man who performs
powerful works. The local residents are eager to
see him do some of these works among them.
Their anticipation rises as Jesus, according
to his custom, goes to the local synagogue.
The service there includes prayer and a reading from the books of Moses, as is done “in
the synagogues on every sabbath.” (Acts 15:21)
Portions of the prophetic books are also read.
When Jesus stands up to read, he likely recognizes many faces from his years of attending
this synagogue. The scroll of the prophet Isaiah
is handed to him. He ?nds the place where it
tells of the One anointed by Jehovah’s spirit,
which passage is found today at Isaiah 61:1, 2.
Jesus reads about how this foretold One
would preach a release to the captives, a recovery of sight to the blind, and the coming
of Jehovah’s acceptable year. Jesus hands the
scroll to the attendant and sits down. All eyes
are intently ?xed upon him. Then he speaks,
probably at some length, and his comments
include the signi?cant statement: “Today this
scripture that you just heard is ful?lled.”—Luke
4:21.
The people marvel at “the gracious words
coming out of his mouth,” and they say to one
another: “This is a son of Joseph, is it not?”

But realizing that they want to see him perform
powerful works like the ones they had heard
about, Jesus continues: “No doubt you will apply this saying to me, ‘Physician, cure yourself. Do also here in your home territory the
things we have heard were done in Capernaum.’ ” (Luke 4:22, 23) Jesus’ former neighbors
likely feel that healing should begin at home, for
the bene?t of his own people ?rst. So they may
think that Jesus has slighted them.
Realizing their thinking, Jesus mentions
some events in Israel’s history. There were many
widows in Israel during the days of Elijah, he
notes, but Elijah was not sent to any of them.
Rather, he went to a non-Israelite widow in Zarephath, a town near Sidon, where Elijah performed a lifesaving miracle. (1 Kings 17:8-16)
And in Elisha’s day, there were many lepers in
Israel, but the prophet cleansed only Naaman
the Syrian.—2 Kings 5:1, 8-14.
How do these people from Jesus’ hometown
react to what they might see as unfavorable historical comparisons that expose their sel?shness and lack of faith? Those in the synagogue
get angry, rise up, and rush Jesus outside the
city. They take him to the brow of the mountain
upon which Nazareth is built, and they try to
throw him over the edge. But Jesus escapes
from their grasp and gets away safely. Jesus
now heads down to Capernaum, on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee.

 Why is there a stir of excitement in Nazareth, Jesus’ hometown?
 How do the people react to Jesus’ speech, but what makes them angry?
 What do the people of Nazareth attempt to do to Jesus?
56

?

JESUS READS FROM THE SCROLL OF ISAIAH
? PEOPLE OF NAZARETH TRY TO KILL JESUS

21

FOUR DISCIPLES WILL BE FISHERS OF MEN
MATTHEW 4:13-22 MARK 1:16-20 LUKE 5:1-11

?

JESUS CALLS DISCIPLES TO FOLLOW HIM FULL-TIME
? FISHERMEN BECOME FISHERS OF MEN

After the people of Nazareth try to take Jesus’
life, he moves to the city of Capernaum, near
the Sea of Galilee, also called “the lake of Gennesaret.” (Luke 5:1) This ful?lls the prophecy in
the book of Isaiah that people of Galilee dwelling by the sea would see a great light.—Isaiah
9:1, 2.
Yes, here in Galilee, Jesus continues to announce that “the Kingdom of the heavens has
drawn near.” (Matthew 4:17) Jesus ?nds four of
his disciples. They had traveled with him earlier, but upon returning with Jesus from Judea,
they resumed their ?shing business. (John 1:
35-42) Now, though, it is time to be with Jesus
constantly so that he can train them to carry on
the ministry after he is gone.
As Jesus walks along the seashore, he sees
Simon Peter, his brother Andrew, and some of
their companions tending to their nets. Jesus
goes over, climbs into Peter’s boat, and asks
him to pull away from land. When they get out
a little distance, Jesus sits down and begins
teaching the crowds who had gathered on the
shore truths about the Kingdom.
Afterward, Jesus says to Peter: “Pull out to
where it is deep, and let down your nets for a
catch.” Peter responds: “Instructor, we toiled all
night and caught nothing, but at your word I will
lower the nets.”—Luke 5:4, 5.
They lower the nets and catch such a great
number of ?sh that the nets begin to rip! Ur-

22

gently, the men motion to their partners in a
boat nearby to come and help. Soon both boats
are ?lled with so many ?sh that the heavily
laden vessels begin to sink. Seeing this, Peter
falls down before Jesus and says: “Depart from
me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.” Jesus responds: “Stop being afraid. From now on you
will be catching men alive.”—Luke 5:8, 10.

Jesus tells Peter and Andrew: “Come after
me, and I will make you ?shers of men.” (Matthew 4:19) He includes two other ?shermen,
James and John, the sons of Zebedee. They too
respond without hesitation. So these four abandon their ?shing business and become the ?rst
full-time disciples of Jesus.

 What sort of men does Jesus call to be full-time disciples, and who are they?
 What miracle frightens Peter?
 The four disciples will now be doing what type of ?shing?
59

JESUS PERFORMS GREAT WORKS IN CAPERNAUM
MATTHEW 8:14-17 MARK 1:21-34 LUKE 4:31- 41

Jesus has invited four disciples—Peter, Andrew,
James, and John—to be ?shers of men. Now, on
the Sabbath, they all go to a local synagogue in
Capernaum. Jesus teaches in the synagogue,
and again the people are astounded at his manner of teaching. He does so as one having authority and not as the scribes.
On this Sabbath a demonized man is present.
Right there in the synagogue, the man shouts
in a loud voice: “What have we to do with you,
Jesus the Nazarene? Did you come to destroy
us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of
God!” Rebuking the demon who is controlling
the man, Jesus says: “Be silent, and come out
of him!”—Mark 1:24, 25.
At that, the wicked spirit throws the man to
the ground in a convulsion and yells at the
top of its voice. But the demon comes out of

DEMON POSSESSION When a demon or

demons gained possession of someone,
they could cause much su?ering. (Matthew 17:14-18) But upon being freed of
the demons, the person returned to a
normal state of mind and body. Repeatedly, Jesus displayed his power to expel
demons by means of God’s holy spirit.
—Luke 8:39; 11:20.

the man “without hurting him.” (Luke 4:35) The
people around him in the synagogue are simply astonished! “What is this?” they ask. “He
authoritatively orders even the unclean spirits, and they obey him.” (Mark 1:27) Understandably, the news about this impressive event
spreads throughout all Galilee.
Leaving the synagogue, Jesus and his disciples go to the home of Simon, or Peter. There
Peter’s mother-in-law is very sick with a high fever. They beg Jesus to help her. So Jesus goes
over, takes her by the hand, and raises her up.
Right away she is cured and begins to wait on
Jesus and the disciples there with him, perhaps
preparing a meal for them.
About sunset, people from all over come
to Peter’s house with their sick ones. Soon it
seems that the whole city is gathered at the
door. Why? They are seeking a cure. In fact, ‘all
those who had people sick with various diseases bring them to him. And laying his hands on
each one of them, he cures them.’ (Luke 4:40)
Yes, no matter what their diseases are, Jesus
helps them, just as was foretold. (Isaiah 53:4)
He even frees those who are demon-possessed.
As the wicked spirits come out, they shout: “You
are the Son of God.” (Luke 4:41) But Jesus rebukes them and does not allow them to speak
anymore. They know that Jesus is the Christ,
and he does not want them to put on the appearance of serving the true God.

 What happens in a synagogue in Capernaum on the Sabbath?
 When leaving the synagogue, where does Jesus go, and what does he do there?
 How do the people of the city react to what Jesus has done there?
60

?

? JESUS CASTS OUT A DEMON
PETER’S MOTHER-IN-LAW IS HEALED

23

EXPANDING HIS MINISTRY IN GALILEE
MATTHEW 4:23-25 MARK 1:35-39 LUKE 4:42, 43

Jesus’ day in Capernaum with his four disciples
has been a busy one. In the evening, the people
of Capernaum bring him their sick ones to be
cured. Jesus has had little time for privacy.
Now, early the following morning while it is
still dark, Jesus gets up and goes outside by
himself. He ?nds a lonely place where he can
pray to his Father in private. But Jesus’ privacy
is short-lived. When they realize that he is missing, “Simon and those with him” hunt for Jesus.
Peter may be taking the lead because Jesus had
been at his home.—Mark 1:36; Luke 4:38.
When they ?nd Jesus, Peter says: “Everyone
is looking for you.” (Mark 1:37) Understandably,
the people of Capernaum want Jesus to stay.
They truly appreciate what he has done, so they
try “to keep him from going away from them.”
(Luke 4:42) However, did Jesus come to earth
primarily to perform such miraculous healings?
And is he to limit his activities just to this locality? What does he say about this?
Jesus answers his disciples: “Let us go somewhere else, into the towns nearby, so that I may
preach there also, for this is why I have come.”
In fact, Jesus even tells the people who want
him to stay: “I must also declare the good news
of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because
for this I was sent.”—Mark 1:38; Luke 4:43.

Yes, a major reason why Jesus has come to
earth is to preach about God’s Kingdom. That
Kingdom will sanctify his Father’s name and
permanently solve all human ills. Jesus gives
evidence that he is sent by God by performing
miraculous healings. In a similar way, centuries
earlier, Moses performed outstanding works to
establish his credentials as one sent by God.
—Exodus 4:1-9, 30, 31.
So Jesus leaves Capernaum to preach in other cities, and his four disciples go with him.
These four are Peter and his brother Andrew as
well as John and his brother James. The week
before, they had been invited to be Jesus’ ?rst
traveling coworkers.
Jesus’ preaching tour of Galilee with these
four disciples is a wonderful success! In fact,
word about Jesus reaches far and wide. “The
report about him spread throughout all Syria,” into the region of the ten cities called
the Decapolis, and over to the other side of
the Jordan River. (Matthew 4:24, 25) Great
crowds from those areas, as well as from Judea, follow Jesus and his disciples. Many bring
to him those seeking a cure. Jesus does not
disappoint them—he cures the sick and expels wicked spirits from those who are demonpossessed.

 What happens early in the morning after Jesus’ busy day in Capernaum?
 Why was Jesus sent to earth, and what purpose do his miracles serve?
 Who go with Jesus on his preaching tour of Galilee, and what is the response to his activities?
62

?

? JESUS TOURS GALILEE WITH FOUR DISCIPLES
HIS PREACHING AND WORKS BECOME WIDELY KNOWN

24

COMPASSIONATELY CURING A LEPER
MATTHEW 8:1- 4 MARK 1:40- 45 LUKE 5:12-16

?

As Jesus and his four disciples go preaching in
the “synagogues throughout the whole of Galilee,” news about the wonderful things Jesus is
doing spreads widely. (Mark 1:39) Word of his
deeds reaches one city where there is a man
sick with leprosy. The physician Luke describes
him as being “full of leprosy.” (Luke 5:12) In its
advanced stages, this dreadful disease slowly
dis?gures various parts of the body.
So this leper is in a grievous condition and
is required to live away from others. Moreover,
he is supposed to call out “Unclean, unclean!”
when people are nearby and thus protect them
from coming too close and risking infection.
(Leviticus 13:45, 46) But what does this leper
now do? He approaches Jesus and falls upon
his face, begging: “Lord, if you just want to, you
can make me clean.”—Matthew 8:2.
What faith the man has in Jesus! And how
pitiful his disease must make him appear! How
will Jesus respond? What would you have done
if you were there? Moved with compassion, Jesus stretches out his hand and actually touches the man. Jesus says to him: “I want to! Be
made clean.” (Matthew 8:3) Hard as it might
be for some to believe, the leprosy immediately vanishes from the sick man.
How would you like to have a king who is as
compassionate and capable as Jesus? The way

JESUS HEALS A LEPER

25

he treats this leper assures us that when Jesus is
King over the whole earth, this Bible prophecy
will be ful?lled: “He will have pity on the lowly
and the poor, and the lives of the poor he will
save.” (Psalm 72:13) Yes, Jesus will then ful?ll
his heart’s desire to help all a?icted ones.
Recall that even prior to the healing of this
leper, Jesus’ ministry has been creating great
excitement among the people. Now people will
hear about this wonderful thing that he has
done. Jesus, though, does not want people to
put faith in him merely on the basis of oral
reports. He knows the prophecy that says he
would “not make his voice heard in the street,”
that is, in some sensational way. (Isaiah 42:1, 2)
Accordingly, Jesus gives the healed leper the
order: “See that you tell no one, but go, show
yourself to the priest, and o?er the gift that Moses appointed.”—Matthew 8:4.
As you can imagine, however, the man is so
happy over being healed that he cannot keep to
himself what has just happened. He goes o?
and spreads the news everywhere. This rouses
increased interest and curiosity among the people. It gets to the point that Jesus cannot openly go into a city, so for a while he stays in lonely places where nobody lives. Still, people from
all over come to be taught by him and to be
cured.

 What e?ect can leprosy have on a person, and what was a leper required to do?
 How does a leper appeal to Jesus, and what can we conclude from Jesus’ response?
 How does the healed man react to what Jesus did, and with what e?ect on others?
65

“YOUR SINS ARE FORGIVEN”
MATTHEW 9:1-8 MARK 2:1-12 LUKE 5:17-26

?

People from far and wide have now heard of Jesus. Many travel even to out-of-the-way places
to hear him teach and to see his powerful
works. However, after some days he returns to
Capernaum, his center of activity. News of his
return spreads quickly through this city alongside the Sea of Galilee. As a result, many come
to the house where he is. Some are Pharisees
and teachers of the Law who have come from
all over Galilee and Judea, including Jerusalem.
‘So many gather that there is no more room,
not even around the door, and he begins to
speak the word to them.’ (Mark 2:2) The stage
is now set for something truly remarkable. It is
an event that can help us to appreciate that Jesus has the power to remove the cause of human su?ering and restore health to all whom he
chooses.
While Jesus is teaching in the crowded room,
four men bring a paralyzed man on a stretcher. They want Jesus to heal their friend. Yet,
because of the crowd, they cannot “bring him
right to Jesus.” (Mark 2:4) Imagine how disappointing that is. They climb up onto the ?at
roof of the house and make an opening through
the tiles. Then they lower the stretcher holding
the paralyzed man down into the house.
Does Jesus get angry at the interruption? No,
indeed! He is deeply impressed by their faith
and says to the paralyzed man: “Your sins are
forgiven.” (Matthew 9:2) But can Jesus actual-

JESUS FORGIVES A PARALYZED
MAN’S SINS AND HEALS HIM

26

ly forgive sins? The scribes and the Pharisees
take issue with this, reasoning: “Why is this man
talking this way? He is blaspheming. Who can
forgive sins except one, God?”—Mark 2:7.
Knowing their thoughts, Jesus says to them:
“Why are you reasoning these things in your
hearts? Which is easier, to say to the paralytic,
‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and
pick up your stretcher and walk’?” (Mark 2:8, 9)
Yes, based on the sacri?ce that Jesus will in
time o?er, he can forgive the man’s sins.
Then, Jesus shows the crowd, including his
critics, that he has authority to forgive sins
on earth. He turns to the paralytic and gives
the command: “I say to you, Get up, pick up
your stretcher, and go to your home.” And the
man immediately does that, walking out carrying his stretcher before the eyes of all those
present. The people are amazed! They glorify
God and exclaim: “We have never seen anything
like this”!—Mark 2:11, 12.
It is worthy of note that Jesus mentions sins
in connection with sickness and that forgiveness of sins can be linked to physical health.
The Bible teaches that our ?rst parent, Adam,
sinned and that all of us have inherited the consequences of sin, namely, sickness and death.
But under the rule of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will
forgive the sins of all who love and serve God.
Then sickness will be removed forever.—Romans 5:12, 18, 19.

 What leads Jesus to heal a paralyzed man in Capernaum?
 How does the man reach Jesus?
 What can we learn from this event about the link between sin and sickness,
and what hope does this o?er us?
67

MATTHEW IS CALLED
MATTHEW 9:9-13 MARK 2:13-17 LUKE 5:27-32

For a short time after healing the paralytic, Jesus remains in the area of Capernaum by the
Sea of Galilee. Again crowds come to him, and
he begins teaching them. As he walks on, he
sees Matthew, who is also called Levi, sitting at
the tax o?ce. Jesus extends a wonderful invitation to him: “Be my follower.”—Matthew 9:9.
Likely, Matthew is already somewhat familiar with Jesus’ teachings and the works he has
performed in the area, as were Peter, Andrew,
James, and John. Like them, Matthew responds
immediately. Matthew describes this in his Gospel, saying: “At that he [Matthew himself] rose
up and followed” Jesus. (Matthew 9:9) Hence,
Matthew leaves his responsibilities as a tax collector behind and becomes a disciple of Jesus.
At some later point, perhaps to express appreciation for this special call from Jesus, Matthew holds a large feast at his house. Who are
invited in addition to Jesus and his disciples?
Well, a number of Matthew’s former associates,
other tax collectors, are present. They collect
taxes for the hated Roman authorities, including taxes on ships coming into the harbor, taxes on caravan tra?c on the main roads, and duties on imported goods. How do the Jews in
general view those tax collectors? The people
despise them because they often dishonestly
exact more money than the regular tax rate.
There are also ‘sinners’ at the feast, individuals who have a reputation for practicing wrongdoing.—Luke 7:37-39.
Observing Jesus at the feast with such people, the self-righteous Pharisees who are present ask his disciples: “Why does your teacher
eat with tax collectors and sinners?” (Matthew 9:11) Overhearing them, Jesus answers:
“Healthy people do not need a physician, but
68

those who are ill do. Go, then, and learn what
this means: ‘I want mercy, and not sacri?ce.’ For
I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.” (Matthew 9:12, 13; Hosea 6:6) The Pharisees are not sincere when they refer to Jesus
as “teacher,” but they can learn something from
him about what is right.
Apparently, Matthew has invited tax collectors and sinners to his home so that they can
listen to Jesus and receive spiritual healing,
“for there were many of them who were following him.” (Mark 2:15) Jesus wants to help
them to attain a healthy relationship with God.
Unlike the self-righteous Pharisees, Jesus does
not despise such ones. He is moved with compassion and mercy; he can serve as a spiritual
physician to all who are spiritually ill.
Jesus shows mercy toward tax collectors and
sinners, not to condone their sins, but to show
tender feelings similar to those that he displayed toward the physically ill. Recall, for example, when he compassionately touched the
leper, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” (Matthew 8:3) Should we not cultivate the same
merciful view and help those in need, especially by assisting them in a spiritual way?

 What is Matthew doing when Jesus sees him?
 Why do other Jews despise tax collectors?
 Why does Jesus associate with sinners?

?

? JESUS CALLS MATTHEW, THE TAX COLLECTOR
CHRIST ASSOCIATES WITH SINNERS TO HELP THEM

27

WHY DO JESUS’ DISCIPLES NOT FAST?
MATTHEW 9:14-17 MARK 2:18-22 LUKE 5:33-39

John the Baptist has been in prison since some
time after Jesus attended the Passover of
30 C.E. John wanted his disciples to become
followers of Jesus, but not all of them have
done so in the months following John’s imprisonment.
Now, as the Passover of 31 C.E. approaches,
some of John’s disciples come to Jesus and ask:
“Why do we and the Pharisees practice fasting but your disciples do not fast?” (Matthew
9:14) The Pharisees practice fasting as a religious ritual. Later, Jesus even uses an illustration in which one Pharisee self-righteously
prays: “O God, I thank you that I am not like
everyone else . . . I fast twice a week.” (Luke 18:
11, 12) John’s disciples may similarly have been
fasting as a custom. Or they may have been

ILLUSTRATIONS ABOUT FASTING Jesus used an

illustration that many listeners could easily
picture—sewing. If someone sewed a piece of
new, unshrunk cloth onto a used garment or
old cloth, what would happen? When the garment is washed, the new patch would shrink
some and pull away from the old cloth, ripping it.
Similarly, wine was sometimes stored in bottles made from animal skins. Over time, the
skin would harden and lose its elasticity. To
put new wine into such a bottle was risky.
New wine might continue to ferment, creating pressure. That could burst
the old, hardened skin.

70

fasting to mourn John’s imprisonment. Observers also wonder why Jesus’ disciples do not
fast, perhaps joining in an expression of grief
over what has been done to John.
Jesus answers using an example: “The
friends of the bridegroom have no reason to
mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them,
do they? But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then
they will fast.”—Matthew 9:15.
John himself spoke of Jesus as a bridegroom. (John 3:28, 29) Accordingly, while Jesus is present, Jesus’ disciples do not fast. Later, when Jesus dies, his disciples will mourn and
have no desire to eat. What a change, though,
when he is resurrected! Then they will have no
further cause for mournful fasting.
Next, Jesus gives these two illustrations:
“Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an
old outer garment, for the new piece pulls away
from the garment and the tear becomes worse.
Nor do people put new wine into old wineskins.
If they do, then the wineskins burst and the wine
spills out and the wineskins are ruined. But people put new wine into new wineskins.” (Matthew
9:16, 17) What is Jesus’ point?
Jesus is helping the disciples of John the
Baptist to appreciate that no one should expect
Jesus’ followers to conform to the old practices
of Judaism, such as ritual fasting. He did not
come to patch up and prolong an old, worn-out
way of worship, a whole system of worship that
was ready to be discarded. The worship that Jesus is encouraging is not one that conforms to
the Judaism of the day with its traditions of
men. No, he is not trying to put a new patch
on an old garment or new wine into a sti?, old
wineskin.

?

JOHN’S DISCIPLES ASK JESUS
ABOUT FASTING

28

 Who in Jesus’ day practice fasting, and why?
 Why do Jesus’ disciples not fast while he is with them, but what might later be a cause for fasting?
 What is the meaning of the illustrations that Jesus relates about a new patch and new wine?
71

CAN ONE DO GOOD WORKS ON THE SABBATH?
JOHN 5:1-16

Jesus has accomplished a lot during his great
ministry in Galilee. However, in saying, “I must
also declare the good news of the Kingdom of
God to other cities,” Jesus has in mind more
than just Galilee. Thus, he goes “preaching in
the synagogues of Judea.” (Luke 4:43, 44) This
is logical because it is now spring and a festival in Jerusalem is approaching.
Compared with what we read of Jesus’ Galilean ministry, we ?nd little in the Gospels about
his activity in Judea. Even if the general reaction in Judea is apathetic, it does not stop
Jesus from preaching actively and doing good
works wherever he is.
Soon Jesus is heading to Judea’s principal
city, Jerusalem, for the Passover of 31 C.E. In
the busy area near the Sheep Gate, there is a
large colonnaded pool called Bethzatha. Many
sick, blind, and lame come to this pool. Why?
Because it is commonly believed that people
can be healed by getting into the pool when the
water is agitated.
It is now the Sabbath, and Jesus sees a man
at this pool who has been sick for 38 years.
Jesus asks: “Do you want to get well?” The
man answers: “Sir, I do not have anyone to put
me into the pool when the water is stirred up,
but while I am on my way, another steps down
ahead of me.”—John 5:6, 7.
Jesus says something that must surprise

the man and anyone else who hears it: “Get
up! Pick up your mat and walk.” (John 5:8)
And that is exactly what he does. Immediately
healed, the man picks up his mat and begins
to walk!
Rather than rejoice over the wonderful thing
that has happened, the Jews see the man and
say judgmentally: “It is the Sabbath, and it is
not lawful for you to carry the mat.” The man
answers them: “The same one who made me
well said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’ ”
(John 5:10, 11) Those Jews are critical of someone who is healing on the Sabbath.
“Who is the man who told you, ‘Pick it up
and walk’?” they want to know. Why do they ask
the man that? Because Jesus has “slipped away
into the crowd,” and the healed man does not
know Jesus’ name. (John 5:12, 13) But this man
is to have another encounter with Jesus. Later,
in the temple, the man meets Jesus and learns
the identity of the one who healed him at the
pool.
The man who was healed ?nds the Jews who
had asked him about his being made well. He
tells them that it was Jesus. On learning this,
the Jews go to Jesus. Do they go to learn by
what means Jesus is able to do such wonderful
things? No. It is, rather, to ?nd fault with Jesus
for doing good things on the Sabbath. And they
even begin persecuting him!

 Why does Jesus head into Judea, and what is he still doing?
 For what reason do many go to the pool that is called Bethzatha?
 What miracle does Jesus perform at the pool, and how do some of the Jews react to what happened?
72

?

? JESUS PREACHES IN JUDEA
HE HEALS A SICK MAN AT A POOL

29

JESUS’ RELATIONSHIP WITH HIS FATHER
JOHN 5:17- 47

When some Jews accuse Jesus of breaking the
Sabbath by healing a man, Jesus replies: “My
Father has kept working until now, and I keep
working.”—John 5:17.
No, what Jesus is doing is not forbidden by
God’s law regarding the Sabbath. His work of
preaching and healing is in imitation of God’s
good works. So Jesus keeps on doing good
every day. His reply to his accusers, however,
makes them even angrier than they were before,
and they seek to kill Jesus. Why this reaction?
In addition to their having the mistaken view
that Jesus is breaking the Sabbath by healing
people, they take great o?ense at his saying
that he is God’s Son. They consider it blasphemy for him to view God as his Father, as if Jesus’ saying that Jehovah is his Father amounts
to making himself equal to God. However, Jesus
is unafraid and answers them further regarding
his special relationship with God. “The Father
has a?ection for the Son,” he says, “and shows
him all the things he himself does.”—John 5:20.
The Father is the Life-Giver, and he has shown
this in the past by empowering men to resurrect
individuals. Jesus continues: “Just as the Father raises the dead up and makes them alive,
so the Son also makes alive whomever he wants
to.” (John 5:21) What a meaningful statement,
giving hope for the future! Even now, the Son is
raising the dead in a spiritual sense. Hence, Jesus says: “Whoever hears my word and believes
the One who sent me has everlasting life, and
he does not come into judgment but has passed
over from death to life.”—John 5:24.
There is no record that Jesus has as yet
raised anyone who was actually dead back to
life, but he tells his accusers that such literal resurrections will occur. “The hour is com74

ing,” he says, “in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out.”
—John 5:28, 29.
As extraordinary as Jesus’ role is, he makes it
clear that he is subordinate to God, stating: “I
cannot do a single thing of my own initiative. . . .
I seek, not my own will, but the will of him who
sent me.” (John 5:30) However, Jesus describes
his own vital role in God’s purpose, which he has
not up to this time done in such a public way.
But those accusing Jesus have more than his
witness about these things. “You have sent men
to John [the Baptist],” Jesus reminds them, “and
he has borne witness to the truth.”—John 5:33.
Jesus’ accusers might well have heard that
about two years earlier, John had told Jewish
religious leaders about the One coming after
him—who was termed “the Prophet” and “the
Christ.” (John 1:20-25) Reminding his accusers
of their once high regard for the now imprisoned John, Jesus says: “For a short time you
were willing to rejoice greatly in his light.” (John
5:35) Yet he provides an even greater witness
than John the Baptist.
“These works that I am doing [including the
healing that he had just performed] bear witness that the Father sent me.” Besides that, Jesus continues: “The Father who sent me has
himself borne witness about me.” (John 5:36,
37) For example, God bore witness about Jesus
at his baptism.—Matthew 3:17.
Really, those accusing Jesus have no excuse
for rejecting him. The Scriptures that they claim
to be searching testify about him. “If you believed Moses, you would believe me,” Jesus concludes, “for he wrote about me. But if you do
not believe his writings, how will you believe
what I say?”—John 5:46, 47.

?

? GOD IS JESUS’ FATHER
RESURRECTION PROMISED

30

 Why is it not a violation of the Sabbath for Jesus to do good works on that day?
 How does Jesus describe his vital role in God’s purpose?
 What witnesses provide proof that Jesus is God’s Son?
75

PLUCKING GRAIN ON THE SABBATH
MATTHEW 12:1-8 MARK 2:23-28 LUKE 6:1-5

Jesus and his disciples now travel northward
toward Galilee. It is springtime, and in the ?elds
there is grain on the stalks. Being hungry, the
disciples pluck some heads of grain and eat.
But the day is a Sabbath, and the Pharisees observe what they are doing.
Recall that recently certain Jews in Jerusalem
wanted to kill Jesus, accusing him of violating
the Sabbath. Now the Pharisees bring an accusation based on the disciples’ actions. “Look!
Your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do
on the Sabbath.”—Matthew 12:2.
The Pharisees claim that picking grain and
rubbing it in the hands to eat is harvesting
and threshing. (Exodus 34:21) Their strict interpretation of what constitutes work makes the

Sabbath burdensome, whereas it was originally meant to be a joyous, spiritually upbuilding
day. Jesus counters their wrong view with examples to show that Jehovah God never meant
for His Sabbath law to be applied that way.
One example Jesus gives is that of David and
his men. When they were hungry, they stopped
at the tabernacle and ate the loaves of presentation. Those loaves, which had already been removed from before Jehovah and replaced by
fresh ones, were ordinarily reserved for the
priests to eat. Yet, under the circumstances,
David and his men were not condemned for eating them.—Leviticus 24:5-9; 1 Samuel 21:1-6.
As a second example, Jesus says: “Have you
not read in the Law that on the Sabbaths the

?

priests in the temple violate the Sabbath and
continue guiltless?” What he means is that even
on the Sabbath, the priests slaughter animals
for sacri?ce and do other work at the temple.
“But I tell you,” Jesus says, “that something
greater than the temple is here.”—Matthew 12:
5, 6; Numbers 28:9.
Jesus again draws on the Scriptures to make
his point: “If you had understood what this
means, ‘I want mercy and not sacri?ce,’ you

DISCIPLES PLUCK GRAIN ON THE SABBATH
? JESUS IS “LORD OF THE SABBATH”

31

would not have condemned the guiltless ones.”
He concludes: “For the Son of man is Lord of
the Sabbath.” Jesus is referring to his coming peaceful Kingdom rule of a thousand years.
—Matthew 12:7, 8; Hosea 6:6.
Humankind has long been su?ering laborious
enslavement by Satan, with violence and war
abounding. What a contrast it will be under the
great Sabbath rule of Christ, who will provide
the time of rest we long for and need!

 The Pharisees make what charge against Jesus’ disciples, and why?
 How does Jesus correct the Pharisees’ view?
 In what way is Jesus “Lord of the Sabbath”?

77

WHAT IS LAWFUL ON THE SABBATH?
MATTHEW 12:9-14 MARK 3:1-6 LUKE 6:6-11

On another Sabbath, Jesus visits a synagogue,
likely in Galilee. There he ?nds a man whose
right hand is withered. (Luke 6:6) The scribes
and the Pharisees are watching Jesus closely.
Why? They reveal what their real intent is when
they ask: “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath?”
—Matthew 12:10.
The Jewish religious leaders believe that
healing is lawful on the Sabbath only if life is in
danger. Thus, for example, on the Sabbath it
is unlawful to set a bone or bandage a sprain,
conditions that are not life threatening. Clearly
the scribes and the Pharisees are not questioning Jesus because they feel genuine concern for
this poor man’s su?ering. They are trying to ?nd
a pretext for condemning Jesus.
Jesus, however, knows their twisted reasoning. He realizes that they have adopted an extreme, unscriptural view of what constitutes a
violation of the prohibition against doing work
on the Sabbath. (Exodus 20:8-10) He has already faced such misplaced criticism of his
good works. Now Jesus sets the stage for a dramatic confrontation by telling the man with the
withered hand: “Get up and come to the center.”
—Mark 3:3.
Turning to the scribes and the Pharisees, Jesus says: “If you have one sheep and that sheep
falls into a pit on the Sabbath, is there a man
among you who will not grab hold of it and lift
it out?” (Matthew 12:11) A sheep represents a
?nancial investment, so they would not leave
it in the pit until the next day; it might die in
the meantime and thus cause them loss. Besides, the Scriptures say: “The righteous one
takes care of his domestic animals.”—Proverbs
12:10.
Drawing a reasonable parallel, Jesus contin78

ues: “How much more valuable is a man than
a sheep! So it is lawful to do a ?ne thing on
the Sabbath.” (Matthew 12:12) Accordingly, Jesus would not be violating the Sabbath by healing the man. The religious leaders are unable to
refute such logical, compassionate reasoning.
They just remain silent.
With indignation, as well as grief at their misguided thinking, Jesus looks around. Then he
says to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” (Matthew 12:13) As the man stretches out his withered hand, it is restored. That is a cause for joy
for the man, but how does it a?ect those trying
to trap Jesus?
Instead of being happy that the man’s hand is
restored, the Pharisees go out and immediately conspire “with the party followers of Herod
against [Jesus], in order to kill him.” (Mark 3:6)
This political party evidently includes members
of the religious group called the Sadducees. Ordinarily, the Sadducees and the Pharisees are
opposed to each other, but now they are solidly united in their opposition to Jesus.

?

HEALING A MAN’S HAND
ON THE SABBATH

32

 What is the setting for a confrontation between Jesus and Jewish religious leaders?
 The Jewish religious leaders have what wrong view of the Sabbath law?
 How does Jesus wisely refute wrong views about the Sabbath?
79

FULFILLING ISAIAH’S PROPHECY
MATTHEW 12:15-21 MARK 3:7-12

Upon learning that the Pharisees and the party followers of Herod plan to kill him, Jesus
and his disciples withdraw to the Sea of Galilee.
Great crowds ?ock to him from all over—from
Galilee, the coastal cities of Tyre and Sidon,
the eastern side of the Jordan River, Jerusalem,
and Idumea farther south. Jesus cures many.
As a result, those with serious diseases press
forward. Not waiting for him to touch them,
they eagerly reach out to touch him.—Mark 3:
9, 10.
The crowds are so large that Jesus tells his
disciples to get a small boat ready for him so
that he can pull away from shore and keep the
crowds from pressing in on him. Also, he can
teach them from the boat or move to another
area along the shore to help more people.
The disciple Matthew notes that Jesus’ activity ful?lls “what was spoken through Isaiah the
prophet.” (Matthew 12:17) What prophecy is Jesus here ful?lling?
“Look! My servant whom I chose, my beloved,
whom I have approved! I will put my spirit upon
him, and what justice is he will make clear to the
nations. He will not quarrel nor cry aloud, nor
will anyone hear his voice in the main streets.
No bruised reed will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish, until he brings justice with success. Indeed, in his name nations
will hope.”—Matthew 12:18-21; Isaiah 42:1-4.
Jesus, of course, is the beloved servant
whom God approves. Jesus makes clear what is
true justice, which is being obscured by false
religious traditions. Unjustly applying God’s
Law in their own way, the Pharisees will not
even come to a sick person’s aid on the Sabbath! Making evident God’s justice and showing that God’s spirit is upon him, Jesus relieves
80

people of the burden of unjust traditions. For
that the religious leaders want to kill him. How
deplorable!
What does it mean that “he will not quarrel
nor cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in
the main streets”? When curing people, Jesus
does not allow them—or the demons—“to make
him known.” (Mark 3:12) He does not want people to learn about him through noisy advertising in the streets or through distorted reports
that are excitedly passed from mouth to mouth.
Also, Jesus carries his comforting message

?

to those who are ?guratively like a bruised reed,
bent over and knocked down. They are like a
smoldering wick, whose last spark of life has
nearly ?ickered out. Jesus does not crush the

? CROWDS PRESS IN ON JESUS
HE FULFILLS ISAIAH’S PROPHECY

33

bruised reed or quench the ?ickering, smoking
?ax. Rather, with tenderness and love, he skillfully lifts up the meek. Truly, Jesus is the one in
whom the nations can hope!

 How does Jesus make justice clear without quarreling or crying aloud in the main streets?
 Who are like bruised reeds and smoldering wicks, and how does Jesus treat them?

81

JESUS CHOOSES TWELVE APOSTLES
MARK 3:13-19 LUKE 6:12-16

It has been about a year and a half since John
the Baptist introduced Jesus as the Lamb of
God. As Jesus began his public ministry, a number of sincere men became his disciples, such
as Andrew, Simon Peter, John, perhaps James
(John’s brother), Philip, and Bartholomew (also
called Nathanael). In time, many others joined
in following Christ.—John 1:45-47.
Now Jesus is ready to select his apostles.
These will be his close associates and will
receive special training. But before selecting
them, Jesus goes out to a mountain, perhaps

one near the Sea of Galilee not far from Capernaum. He spends a whole night in prayer, likely
asking for wisdom and God’s blessing. The next
day he calls his disciples to him and chooses 12
of his disciples as apostles.
Jesus selects the six named at the outset, as
well as Matthew, whom Jesus called from the
tax o?ce. The other ?ve chosen are Judas (also
called Thaddaeus and “the son of James”),

Simon the Cananaean, Thomas, James the son
of Alphaeus, and Judas Iscariot.—Matthew 10:
2-4; Luke 6:16.
By now these 12 have traveled with Jesus,
and he knows them well. A number of them
are his relatives. The brothers James and John
are evidently Jesus’ ?rst cousins. And if, as
some think, Alphaeus was the brother of Joseph, Jesus’ adoptive father, then Alphaeus’
son, the apostle James, would be a cousin of
Jesus.
Jesus, of course, has no problem remembering his apostles’ names. But can you remember them? One help is to remember that there
are two named Simon, two named James, and
two named Judas. Simon (Peter) has a brother Andrew, and James (son of Zebedee) has
a brother John. That is a key to remembering
the names of eight apostles. The other four include a tax collector (Matthew), one who later
doubts (Thomas), one called from under a tree
(Nathanael), and Nathanael’s friend (Philip).
Eleven of the apostles are from Galilee, Jesus’ home territory. Nathanael is from Cana.
Philip, Peter, and Andrew are originally from
Bethsaida. Peter and Andrew in time move to
Capernaum, where Matthew apparently lived.
James and John also live in or close to Capernaum, and they had a ?shing business nearby.
Judas Iscariot, who later betrays Jesus, seems
to be the only apostle from Judea.

 What serious decision does Jesus make after spending all night in prayer?
 Who are Jesus’ apostles, and how may you be able to remember their names?

82

?

THE 12 APOSTLES

34

THE FAMOUS SERMON ON THE MOUNT
MATTHEW 5:1–7:29 LUKE 6:17- 49

?

Jesus must be tired after spending the whole
night in prayer and then choosing 12 disciples
to be apostles. It is now day, but he still has the
strength and desire to help people. He does so
on a mountainside in Galilee, perhaps not far
from his center of activity in Capernaum.
Crowds have come to him from distant locations. Some are from down south, from Jerusalem and places in Judea. Others are from the
coastal cities of Tyre and Sidon to the northwest. Why have they come looking for Jesus?
“To hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.” And that is just what happens—Jesus
is “healing them all.” Think of that! All the sick
ones are healed. Jesus also ministers to “those
troubled with unclean spirits,” people who are
a?icted by the wicked angels of Satan.—Luke
6:17-19.
Jesus next ?nds a level place on the mountainside and the crowd gathers around. His disciples, especially the 12 apostles, are probably
nearest to him. All are eager to hear from this
teacher who is able to perform such powerful works. Jesus delivers a sermon that clearly bene?ts his listeners. Since then, countless
others have also bene?ted from it. We can too
because of its depth of spiritual content presented with simplicity and clarity. Jesus draws
on ordinary experiences and things familiar to
people. This makes his ideas understandable to
all who are seeking a better life in God’s way.
What key aspects of Jesus’ sermon make it so
valuable?

SERMON ON THE MOUNT

35

WHO ARE TRULY HAPPY?

Everyone wants to be happy. Knowing this,
Jesus begins by describing those who are truly
happy. Imagine how this captures the attention
of his listeners. But some things must puzzle
them.
He says: “Happy are those conscious of their
spiritual need, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them. Happy are those who
mourn, since they will be comforted. . . . Happy
are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, since they will be ?lled. . . . Happy are
those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, since the Kingdom of the heavens
belongs to them. Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you . . . for my sake.
Rejoice and be overjoyed.”—Matthew 5:3-12.
What does Jesus mean by saying “happy”?
He is not referring to being jovial or mirthful, as
when one is having a good time. Genuine happiness is deeper. It involves real contentment,
a sense of satisfaction and ful?llment in life.
Jesus says that people who recognize their
spiritual need, who are saddened by their sinful condition, and who come to know and serve
God are the truly happy ones. Even if they are
hated or persecuted for doing God’s will, they
are happy because they know that they are
pleasing him and that he will reward them with
everlasting life.
Many people, though, think that being prosperous and pursuing pleasures are what makes
one happy. Jesus says otherwise. Drawing a

 Where does Jesus give his most memorable sermon, and who are present for it?
 What makes Jesus’ sermon so valuable?
 Who are truly happy, and why?

85

contrast that must make many of his listeners
think, he says: “Woe to you who are rich, for you
are having your consolation in full. Woe to you
who are ?lled up now, for you will go hungry.
Woe, you who are laughing now, for you will
mourn and weep. Woe whenever all men speak
well of you, for this is what their forefathers did
to the false prophets.”—Luke 6:24-26.
Why do having riches, laughing in delight,
and enjoying praise from others bring woe? Because when someone has and cherishes these

light of the world.” A lamp
is not put under a basket
but is set on a lampstand,
where it can shed light.
So Jesus urges: “Let your
light shine before men, so
that they may see your
?ne works and give glory to your Father who is
in the heavens.”—Matthew
5:14-16.
A HIGH STANDARD FOR
HIS FOLLOWERS

The Jewish religious leaders view Jesus as
a transgressor of God’s Law and recently conspired to kill him. So Jesus says openly: “Do not
think I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I came, not to destroy, but to ful?ll.”—Matthew 5:17.
Yes, Jesus has the highest regard for God’s
Law and urges others to have the same. In
things, serving God may be neglected at the
cost of true happiness. Jesus is not saying that
simply being poor or hungry makes one happy. However, it is often the disadvantaged person who responds to Jesus’ teachings and who
gains the blessing of true happiness.
With his disciples in mind, Jesus says: “You
are the salt of the earth.” (Matthew 5:13) Of
course, they are not literal salt. Rather, salt is a
preservative. A large amount of it is kept near
the altar at God’s temple and is used to salt offerings. It also represents freedom from corruption or decay. (Leviticus 2:13; Ezekiel 43:23, 24)
Jesus’ disciples are “the salt of the earth” in
that their in?uence on people has a preserving
e?ect, helping them to avoid spiritual and moral decay. Yes, their message can preserve the
lives of all who respond to it.
Jesus also tells the disciples: “You are the
86

fact, he says: “Whoever, therefore, breaks one
of these least commandments and teaches others to do so will be called least in relation to the
Kingdom of the heavens.” He means that such
a person will not get into the Kingdom at all.
“But,” he continues, “whoever does them and
teaches them will be called great in relation to
the Kingdom of the heavens.”—Matthew 5:19.
Jesus condemns even attitudes that contribute to a person’s breaking God’s Law. After noting that the Law says “You must not murder,”
Jesus adds: “Everyone who continues wrathful with his brother will be accountable to the
court of justice.” (Matthew 5:21, 22) To continue
wrathful with an associate is serious, perhaps
even leading to murder. Hence, Jesus explains
the extent to which one should go to achieve
peace: “If, then, you are bringing your gift to the
altar and there you remember that your brother
has something against you, leave your gift there
in front of the altar, and go away. First make your
peace with your brother, and then come back
and o?er your gift.”—Matthew 5:23, 24.
Another commandment of the Law is against
adultery. Jesus comments: “You heard that it
was said: ‘You must not commit adultery.’ But I
say to you that everyone who keeps on looking
at a woman so as to have a passion for her
has already committed adultery with her in his
heart.” (Matthew 5:27, 28) Jesus is not speaking
merely about a passing immoral thought; rather, he is stressing the seriousness of the matter
when one “keeps on looking.” Continued looking often arouses passionate desire. Then, if
an opportunity arises, it can result in adultery.
How can a person prevent this from happening?
Extreme measures may be necessary. Jesus

says: “If, now, your right
eye is making you stumble, tear it out and throw
it away from you. . . . If
your right hand is making
you stumble, cut it o? and
throw it away from you.”
—Matthew 5:29, 30.
To save their life, some
people have willingly sacri?ced a severely diseased limb. Understandably, Jesus says that it is more important to
‘throw away’ anything, even something as precious as an eye or a hand, to avoid immoral
thinking and its resulting actions. “Better for
you to lose one of your members,” Jesus explains, “than for your whole body to land in
Gehenna” (a burning rubbish heap outside Jerusalem’s walls), which implies permanent destruction.
Jesus also o?ers counsel on dealing with
people who cause injury and o?ense. “Do not
resist the one who is wicked,” he says, “but whoever slaps you on your right cheek, turn the other also to him.” (Matthew 5:39) That is not to
say that a person cannot defend himself or his

 In contrast to those who are truly happy, who have woe, and why?
 How are Jesus’ disciples “the salt of the earth” and “the light of the world”?
 Does Jesus show high regard for God’s Law? Explain.
 How does Jesus provide help to root out the causes of murder and adultery?

87

family if attacked. Jesus mentions a slap, which
is not given to hurt severely or to kill another;
rather, it is an insult. He is saying that if someone tries to provoke a ?ght or an argument, either by giving an openhanded slap or by using
insulting words, do not retaliate.
That advice is in line with God’s law to love
one’s neighbor. So Jesus advises his listeners:
“Continue to love your enemies and to pray for
those who persecute you.” He gives a powerful
reason why: “So that you may prove yourselves
sons of your Father who is in the heavens, since
he makes his sun rise on both the wicked and
the good.”—Matthew 5:44, 45.
Jesus sums up this portion of his sermon,
saying: “You must accordingly be perfect, as
your heavenly Father is perfect.” (Matthew 5:
48) Obviously, he does not mean that people
can be fully perfect. However, by imitating God,
we can expand our love to embrace even our enemies. Put another way: “Continue being merciful, just as your Father is merciful.”—Luke 6:36.
PRAYER AND TRUST IN GOD

As Jesus continues his sermon, he urges his
listeners: “Take care not to practice your righteousness in front of men to be noticed by

them.” Jesus condemns a hypocritical show of
godliness, adding: “When you make gifts of
mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, as
the hypocrites do.” (Matthew 6:1, 2) It is better
to give gifts of mercy in private.
Jesus next says: “When you pray, do not act
like the hypocrites, for they like to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of
the main streets to be seen by men.” Rather,
he says: “When you pray, go into your private
room and, after shutting your door, pray to your
Father who is in secret.” (Matthew 6:5, 6) Jesus is not against all public prayers, for he himself o?ered such prayers.
He is denouncing prayers
said in a way to impress
listeners and draw admiring compliments.
He counsels the crowd:
“When praying, do not
say the same things over
and over again as the
people of the nations do.”
(Matthew 6:7) Jesus does
not mean that repeatedly praying about the same
subject is wrong. He is
expressing disapproval of using memorized
phrases “over and over again,” praying by rote.
He then provides a model prayer that includes
seven petitions. The ?rst three recognize God’s
right to rule and his purposes—that his name be
sancti?ed, that his Kingdom come, and that his
will be done. Only after such matters should we
make personal requests for our daily food and
for forgiveness of sins, as well as requests not
to be tempted beyond one’s endurance and to
be delivered from the wicked one.

 What does Jesus mean when he says to turn the other cheek?
 How can we be perfect as God is perfect?
 What instructions on prayer does Jesus provide?

TEACHING BY REPETITION On occasion, Jesus re-

peated key teachings. For example, in the Sermon
on the Mount, he taught his listeners how to pray
and helped them to have a proper view of material things.—Matthew 6:9-13, 25-34.
About a year and a half later, Jesus restated
those teachings. (Luke 11:1-4; 12:22-31) This repetition, in addition to bene?ting those who were
not present on the ?rst occasion,
helped his disciples to ?x
in mind the main points.

How important should our possessions be to
us? Jesus urges the crowd: “Stop storing up for
yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth
and rust consume and where thieves break
in and steal.” How reasonable! Material treasures can and do perish, and our having them
builds up no merit with God. Accordingly, Jesus
next says: “Store up for yourselves treasures in
heaven.” We can do this by putting God’s service ?rst in life. Nobody can take away our good
standing with God or its reward of everlasting life. So true are Jesus’
words: “Where your treasure is, there your heart
will be also.”—Matthew 6:
19-21.
Emphasizing this point,
Jesus gives an illustration: “The lamp of the
body is the eye. If, then, your eye is focused,
your whole body will be bright. But if your eye
is envious, your whole body will be dark.” (Matthew 6:22, 23) When our eye functions properly, it is like a lighted lamp to our body. But to be
such, our eye must be focused on one thing;
otherwise, we could develop a mistaken esti-

mate of life. Focusing on material possessions
instead of on serving God would mean that our
“whole body will be dark,” perhaps drawn to
what is shady or dark.
Jesus then gives a powerful example: “No
one can slave for two masters; for either he
will hate the one and love the other, or he will
stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.”—Matthew
6:24.
Some hearing Jesus might be concerned
about how they should view their material
needs. So he assures them that they do not
need to be anxious if they put God’s service
?rst. “Observe intently the birds of heaven;
they do not sow seed or reap or gather into
89

storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds
them.”—Matthew 6:26.
And what about the lilies of the ?eld there
on the mountain? Jesus notes that “not even
Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of
these.” What does this show? “If this is how God
clothes the vegetation of the ?eld that is here
today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will
he not much rather clothe you?” (Matthew 6:
29, 30) Jesus wisely urges: “Never be anxious
and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we
to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to wear?’ . . . Your
heavenly Father knows that you need all these
things. Keep on, then, seeking ?rst the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other
things will be added to you.”—Matthew 6:31-33.

swine,” Jesus urges them. (Matthew 7:6) Truths
from God’s Word are precious, like ?gurative
pearls. If some people act like animals, showing no appreciation for these precious truths,
the disciples should leave them and seek ones
who are receptive.
Returning to the subject of prayer, Jesus
stresses the need to persist in it. “Keep on asking, and it will be given you.” God is ready to

HOW TO GAIN LIFE

The apostles and other sincere ones want to
live in a way that pleases God, but that is not
easy in their circumstances. Many Pharisees,
for example, are critical, harshly judging others.
So Jesus admonishes his listeners: “Stop judging that you may not be judged; for with the
judgment you are judging, you will be judged.”
—Matthew 7:1, 2.
It is dangerous to follow the lead of the overly
critical Pharisees, as Jesus illustrates: “A blind
man cannot guide a blind man, can he? Both
will fall into a pit, will they not?” Then how
should Jesus’ listeners view others? Not with a
critical eye, because that would be a serious offense. He asks: “How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, allow me to remove the straw that
is in your eye,’ while you yourself do not see the
rafter in your own eye? Hypocrite! First remove
the rafter from your own eye, and then you will
see clearly how to remove the straw that is in
your brother’s eye.”—Luke 6:39-42.
This does not mean that the disciples are not
to make any judgments at all. “Do not give what
is holy to dogs nor throw your pearls before
90

answer prayers, as Jesus emphasizes by asking: “Which one of you, if his son asks for bread,
will hand him a stone? . . . Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good
gifts to your children, how much more so will
your Father who is in the heavens give good
things to those asking him!”—Matthew 7:7-11.
Jesus then sets out what has become a famous rule of conduct: “All things, therefore,
that you want men to do to you, you also must
do to them.” Should not all of us take to heart
and apply that positive exhortation in our dealings with others? Doing so, however, may be
challenging, as revealed by Jesus’ instruction:
“Go in through the narrow gate, because broad

is the gate and spacious is the road leading o?
into destruction, and many are going in through
it; whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the
road leading o? into life, and few are ?nding it.”
—Matthew 7:12-14.
There are those who
would try to divert the disciples from the way leading to life, so Jesus warns:
“Be on the watch for the
false prophets who come
to you in sheep’s covering,
but inside they are ravenous wolves.” (Matthew 7:
15) Good trees and bad

trees can be recognized by their fruits, Jesus
notes. It is similar with people. Thus, we can recognize false prophets by their teachings and actions. Yes, Jesus explains, it is not simply what
a person says that makes him his disciple but
also what he does. Some people claim that Jesus is their Lord, but what if they are not doing
God’s will? Jesus says: “I will declare to them: ‘I
never knew you! Get away from me, you workers
of lawlessness!’ ”—Matthew 7:23.
Concluding his sermon, Jesus declares:
“Everyone who hears these sayings of mine and
does them will be like a discreet man who built
his house on the rock. And the rain poured
down and the ?oods came and the winds blew
and lashed against that house, but it did not
cave in, for it had been founded on the rock.”
(Matthew 7:24, 25) Why did the house stand?
Because the man “dug and went down deep and
laid a foundation on the rock.” (Luke 6:48) So
more is involved than just hearing Jesus’ words.
We must exert ourselves to ‘do them.’
What, though, about the one “hearing these
sayings” but “not doing them”? He is “like a
foolish man who built his house on the sand.”
(Matthew 7:26) Rain, ?oods, and winds would
cause such a house to collapse.
The crowds are astounded at Jesus’ way of
teaching in this sermon. He does so as a person having authority and not as the religious
leaders. Probably many of those who listened to
him become his disciples.

 Why are spiritual treasures superior, and how are they obtained?
 Why do Jesus’ followers have no need to be anxious?
 What does Jesus say about judging others, yet why do we need to make some judgments at times?
 What does Jesus further say about prayer, and what rule of conduct does he give?
 How does Jesus show that being his disciple is not easy and that being misled is a danger?
91

A CENTURION SHOWS GREAT FAITH
MATTHEW 8:5-13 LUKE 7:1-10

?

After giving his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus
goes to the city of Capernaum. Here some elders of the Jews approach him. They have been
sent by a man of a di?erent background—a Roman army o?cer, a centurion.
The army o?cer’s beloved servant is seriously ill and about to die. Though the centurion is
a Gentile, he is seeking Jesus’ help. The Jews
tell Jesus that the man’s servant “is laid up in
the house with paralysis, and he is su?ering
terribly,” perhaps being in great pain. (Matthew
8:6) The Jewish elders assure Jesus that this
centurion is worthy of being granted this help,
explaining: “He loves our nation and he himself
built our synagogue.”—Luke 7:4, 5.
Soon, Jesus leaves with the elders for the
army o?cer’s house. As they near it, the o?cer
sends out friends to say: “Sir, do not bother,
for I am not worthy to have you come under
my roof. That is why I did not consider myself
worthy to come to you.” (Luke 7:6, 7) What a
humble expression from someone used to giving orders! And it shows how di?erent this man
is from Romans who treat slaves harshly.—Matthew 8:9.
The centurion no doubt is aware that Jews
avoid fellowshipping with non-Jews. (Acts 10:
28) Perhaps with this in mind, the o?cer has his
friends urge Jesus: “Say the word, and let my
servant be healed.”—Luke 7:7.
Jesus is amazed to hear this and comments:

AN ARMY OFFICER’S SLAVE IS HEALED
? THOSE WITH FAITH WILL BE BLESSED

36

“I tell you, not even in Israel have I found so
great a faith.” (Luke 7:9) On returning to the
centurion’s house, his friends discover that the
slave who was so ill is now in good health.
Once Jesus has performed that healing, he
uses the occasion to con?rm that non-Jews
of faith will be favored with blessings, saying:
“Many from east and west will come and recline at the table with Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of the heavens.” What
about faithless Jews? Jesus says that they “will
be thrown into the darkness outside. There is
where their weeping and the gnashing of their
teeth will be.”—Matthew 8:11, 12.

Hence, natural Jews who do not accept the
opportunity o?ered ?rst to them to be part of
the Kingdom with Christ will be rejected. But
Gentiles will be welcomed to recline at his table,
as it were, “in the Kingdom of the heavens.”

 Why do Jews plead on behalf of a Gentile army o?cer?
 What may explain why the centurion has not asked Jesus to enter his house?
 What prospect for Gentiles does Jesus highlight?
93

JESUS RESURRECTS A WIDOW’S SON
LUKE 7:11-17

Soon after healing the army o?cer’s servant,
Jesus leaves Capernaum for Nain, a city over
20 miles to the southwest. He is not alone. His
disciples and a great crowd travel with him. It is
likely toward evening when they approach the
outskirts of Nain. There they encounter a considerable number of Jews in a funeral procession. The dead body of a young man is being
carried out of the city for burial.
The most grief-stricken among them is the
mother of the young man. She is a widow, and
now her only child has died. When her husband
died, at least she still had her beloved son with
her. Imagine how close she must have felt to
him, for her hopes and her security for the future were tied up with him. Now he too has died.
Who is there left to provide her with company
and support?
When Jesus sees this woman, his heart is
touched by her extreme grief and the sad-

ness of her situation. Tenderly and yet with assurance that imparts con?dence, he tells her:
“Stop weeping.” Yet, he does more. He approaches and touches the bier on which the
body is being carried. (Luke 7:13, 14) His manner and actions are such that the mourning
townspeople stop in their tracks. ‘What does he
mean, and what is he going to do?’ many must
wonder.
And what of those traveling with Jesus who
have seen him perform powerful works, healing many diseases? They apparently have never seen Jesus resurrect anyone from the dead.
Although resurrections did occur in the distant
past, can Jesus do such a thing? (1 Kings 17:1723; 2 Kings 4:32-37) Jesus gives the command:
“Young man, I say to you, get up!” (Luke 7:14)
And that happens. The man sits up and starts
to speak! Jesus gives him to his shocked yet
overjoyed mother. She is no longer alone.

?

A RESURRECTION AT NAIN

37

When the people see that the young man truly is alive, they praise the Life-Giver, Jehovah,
saying: “A great prophet has been raised up
among us.” Others grasp the signi?cance of Jesus’ wonderful deed, saying: “God has turned
his attention to his people.” (Luke 7:16) The
news of this amazing thing quickly spreads into
the surrounding country and likely to Jesus’
hometown, Nazareth, some six miles away. The
report even spreads down south into Judea.
John the Baptist is still in prison, and he is
very interested in the works that Jesus is able to
perform. John’s disciples tell him about these
miracles. How does he respond?
 What is happening as Jesus approaches Nain?
 How is Jesus a?ected by what he sees,
and how does he respond?
 What is the reaction of the people to what
Jesus does?

95

JOHN WANTS TO HEAR FROM JESUS
MATTHEW 11:2-15 LUKE 7:18-30

For about a year, John the Baptist has been
in prison. Still, he hears of Jesus’ marvelous
works. Imagine how John feels when his disciples tell him that Jesus has resurrected the widow’s son at Nain. However, John wants to hear
directly from Jesus about what this all means.
So John summons two of his disciples. To do
what? They are to ask Jesus: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a di?erent one?”
—Luke 7:19.
Does that seem to be a strange question?
John is a devoted man who, when baptizing Jesus nearly two years before, saw God’s spirit descend upon Jesus and heard God’s voice
of approval. We have no reason to think that
John’s faith has grown weak. Otherwise, Jesus would not speak so highly of John, as he
does on this occasion. But if John is not having
doubts, why does he ask this question of Jesus?
John may simply want veri?cation directly
from Jesus that he is the Messiah. This would
strengthen John as he languishes in prison. And
John’s question apparently has an added sense.
He is acquainted with the Bible prophecies that
show that the Anointed One of God is to be a
king and a deliverer. Yet, many months after Jesus was baptized, John is in prison. So John is
asking if there is to be another one coming, a
successor to Jesus, as it were, who will complete the ful?llment of all that the Messiah was
foretold to accomplish.
Rather than simply tell John’s disciples, ‘Of
course I am the One who is to come,’ Jesus
gives evidence that he has God’s backing by
healing many people of all kinds of diseases
and ailments. Then he tells the disciples: “Go
and report to John what you are hearing and
seeing: The blind are now seeing and the lame
96

are walking, the lepers are being cleansed and
the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised
up and the poor are being told the good news.”
—Matthew 11:4, 5.
John’s question might imply an expectation
that Jesus will do more than he is now doing
and will perhaps free John from prison. Jesus,
however, is telling John not to expect more than
the miracles he is actually performing.
When John’s disciples leave, Jesus assures
the crowd that John is more than a prophet.
He is “the messenger” of Jehovah prophesied
about at Malachi 3:1. He is also the prophet
Elijah, as foretold at Malachi 4:5, 6. Jesus explains: “Truly I say to you, among those born of
women, there has not been raised up anyone
greater than John the Baptist, but a lesser person in the Kingdom of the heavens is greater
than he is.”—Matthew 11:11.
By saying that a lesser one in the Kingdom
of the heavens is greater than John, Jesus is
showing that John will not be in the heavenly Kingdom. John prepared the way for Jesus
but dies before Christ opens the way to heaven.
(Hebrews 10:19, 20) John is, though, a faithful
prophet of God and will be an earthly subject
of God’s Kingdom.

?

JOHN THE BAPTIST ASKS ABOUT JESUS’ ROLE
? JESUS PRAISES JOHN

38

 Why does John ask whether Jesus is the Coming One or whether to expect a di?erent one?
 Jesus says that John the Baptist ful?lled what prophecies?
 Why will John the Baptist not be in heaven with Jesus?
97

WOE TO AN UNRESPONSIVE GENERATION
MATTHEW 11:16-30 LUKE 7:31-35

Jesus has high regard for John the Baptist,
but how do most people regard John? “This
generation,” Jesus declares, “is like young children sitting in the marketplaces who call out to
their playmates, saying: ‘We played the ?ute for
you, but you did not dance; we wailed, but you
did not beat yourselves in grief.’ ”—Matthew 11:
16, 17.
What does Jesus mean? He clari?es the
thought: “John came neither eating nor drinking, but people say, ‘He has a demon.’ The Son
of man did come eating and drinking, but people say, ‘Look! A man who is a glutton and is given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors
and sinners.’ ” (Matthew 11:18, 19) On the one
hand, John has lived a simple life as a Nazirite,
even abstaining from wine, yet this generation
says he is demonized. (Numbers 6:2, 3; Luke 1:
15) On the other hand, Jesus lives like other
men. He eats and drinks in a balanced way, but
he is accused of going to excess. It seems impossible to satisfy the people.
Jesus likens the generation to young children in the marketplaces who refuse to respond by dancing when other children play the
?ute or by grieving when others wail. “All the
same,” he says, “wisdom is proved righteous by
its works.” (Matthew 11:16, 19) Yes, the “works”
—that is, the evidence produced by John and
Jesus—prove that the accusations against them
are false.
After Jesus characterizes the generation as
unresponsive, he singles out for reproach the
cities of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum,
where he has done powerful works. Jesus says
that if he had performed such works in the

98

Phoenician cities of Tyre and Sidon, those cities
would have repented. He also mentions Capernaum, which has been his home base for some
time. Even there, most did not respond. Jesus
says of that city: “It will be more endurable for
the land of Sodom on Judgment Day than for
you.”—Matthew 11:24.
Jesus then praises his Father, who hides precious spiritual truths “from the wise and intellectual ones” but reveals these things to lowly
ones, who are like young children. (Matthew 11:
25) He extends an appealing invitation to such
ones: “Come to me, all you who are toiling
and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take
my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I
am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you
will ?nd refreshment for yourselves. For my
yoke is kindly, and my load is light.”—Matthew
11:28-30.
How does Jesus o?er refreshment? The religious leaders have burdened the people with
enslaving traditions, such as overly restrictive
Sabbath regulations. But Jesus refreshes them
by teaching the truth of God, free from the taint
of those traditions. He also shows the way of relief to ones who feel crushed by the domination of political authorities and to those who
feel weighed down by sin. Yes, Jesus reveals to
them how their sins can be forgiven and how
they can be at peace with God.
All of those accepting Jesus’ kindly yoke can
dedicate themselves to God and serve our compassionate, merciful heavenly Father. Doing so
does not involve a heavy load, for God’s requirements are not at all burdensome.—1 John
5:3.

?

? JESUS REPROACHES CERTAIN CITIES
HE OFFERS RELIEF AND REFRESHMENT

39

 How are the people of Jesus’ generation like children?
 What moves Jesus to praise his heavenly Father?
 In what ways are many people burdened, but what relief does Jesus o?er?
99

A LESSON IN FORGIVENESS
LUKE 7:36-50

Depending on their heart condition, people respond di?erently to what Jesus says and does.
That becomes clear at a house in Galilee. A
Pharisee named Simon invites Jesus to a meal,
perhaps to get a closer look at the one performing such remarkable works. Likely viewing this
as an opportunity to minister to those present,
Jesus accepts, even as he has on other occasions accepted invitations to eat with tax collectors and sinners.
However, Jesus does not receive the cordial attention usually given to guests. On dusty
roads in Palestine, sandal-clad feet become hot
and dirty, so it is a customary act of hospitality to wash a guest’s feet with cool water. That
is not done for Jesus. Neither does he receive a
welcoming kiss, as is common. Another custom
is to pour some oil on a guest’s hair out of kindness and hospitality. This too is not done for Jesus. So how welcome is he really?
The meal begins, with the guests reclining at
the table. As they eat, a woman quietly enters
the room uninvited. She is “known in the city to
be a sinner.” (Luke 7:37) All imperfect humans
are sinners, yet this woman seems to be living
an immoral life, perhaps as a prostitute. She
may have heard Jesus’ teachings, including his
invitation for ‘all those who are loaded down
to come to him for refreshment.’ (Matthew 11:
28, 29) Apparently moved by Jesus’ words and
deeds, she has now sought him out.
She comes up behind Jesus at the table and
kneels at his feet. Tears fall from her eyes onto
his feet, and she wipes them with her hair.
She tenderly kisses his feet and pours on them
some fragrant oil that she has brought. Simon
watches with disapproval, saying to himself: “If
100

this man were really a prophet, he would know
who and what kind of woman it is who is touching him, that she is a sinner.”—Luke 7:39.
Perceiving Simon’s thinking, Jesus says: “Simon, I have something to say to you.” He replies: “Teacher, say it!” Jesus continues: “Two
men were debtors to a certain lender; the one
was in debt for 500 denarii, but the other for
50. When they did not have anything to pay him
back with, he freely forgave them both. Therefore, which one of them will love him more?”
Perhaps with an air of indi?erence, Simon answers: “I suppose it is the one whom he forgave
more.”—Luke 7:40-43.
Jesus agrees. Then looking at the woman,
he says to Simon: “Do you see this woman?
I entered your house; you gave me no water
for my feet. But this woman wet my feet with
her tears and wiped them o? with her hair. You
gave me no kiss, but this woman, from the hour
that I came in, did not stop tenderly kissing my
feet. You did not pour oil on my head, but this
woman poured perfumed oil on my feet.” Jesus
could see that this woman was giving evidence
of heartfelt repentance for her immoral life. So
he concludes: “I tell you, her sins, many though
they are, are forgiven, because she loved much.
But the one who is forgiven little, loves little.”
—Luke 7:44-47.
Jesus is not excusing immorality. Rather,
he is manifesting compassionate understanding of people who commit serious sins but who
then show that they are sorry and turn to Christ
for relief. And what relief this woman feels
when Jesus says: “Your sins are forgiven. . . .
Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”—Luke 7:
48, 50.

?

A SINFUL WOMAN POURS OIL ON JESUS’ FEET
? FORGIVENESS ILLUSTRATED WITH A DEBTOR

40

 How is Jesus received by his host, Simon?
 Why does a local woman seek Jesus out?
 What illustration does Jesus use, and how does he apply it?
101

MIRACLES—BY WHOSE POWER?
MATTHEW 12:22-32 MARK 3:19-30 LUKE 8:1-3

Soon after speaking about forgiveness at the
home of the Pharisee Simon, Jesus begins another preaching tour of Galilee. He is in the second year of his ministry, and he is not traveling
alone. The 12 apostles are with him, as well as
certain women whom he had “cured of wicked spirits and sicknesses.” (Luke 8:2) Among
them are Mary Magdalene, Susanna, and Joanna, whose husband is an o?cer of King Herod
Antipas.
As more people learn of Jesus, the controversy over his activity intensi?es. That is clear when
a demon-possessed man, who is blind and unable to speak, is brought to Jesus and is cured.
Now the man is free of demon control and can
both see and speak. The people are simply carried away, saying: “May this not perhaps be the
Son of David?”—Matthew 12:23.

The crowds gathered around the house where
Jesus is staying are so large that he and his disciples cannot even eat a meal. Not all, though,
think that Jesus is the promised “Son of David.” Some scribes and Pharisees have come
all the way from Jerusalem—but not to learn
from Jesus or to support him. They are telling people: “He has Beelzebub” and thus is in
league with “the ruler of the demons.” (Mark 3:
22) When Jesus’ relatives hear about the commotion, they come to lay hold of Jesus. For what
reason?
Well, at this point, Jesus’ own brothers do not
believe that he is God’s Son. (John 7:5) The Jesus who seems to be creating this public uproar
is not like the Jesus they knew while they were
growing up together in Nazareth. Concluding
that something must be mentally wrong with

?

? JESUS’ SECOND PREACHING TOUR BEGINS
EXPELS DEMONS AND WARNS OF UNFORGIVABLE SIN

him, they say: “He has gone out of his mind.”
—Mark 3:21.
What does the evidence prove, though? Jesus
just healed a demonized man, who can now see
and speak. No one can deny this. So the scribes
and Pharisees try to discredit Jesus with a false
charge. They say: “This fellow does not expel
the demons except by means of Beelzebub, the
ruler of the demons.”—Matthew 12:24.
Jesus knows what the scribes and Pharisees
are thinking, so he points out: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and
every city or house divided against itself will
not stand. In the same way, if Satan expels
Satan, he has become divided against himself;
how, then, will his kingdom stand?”—Matthew
12:25, 26.
What impressive logic! The Pharisees know
that some Jews practice the casting out of demons. (Acts 19:13) So Jesus asks: “If I expel the
demons by means of Beelzebub, by whom do
your sons expel them?” In other words, their
charge should just as well be applied to them.
Jesus then extends the reasoning: “But if it is
by means of God’s spirit that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken
you.”—Matthew 12:27, 28.
To illustrate that his expelling demons is evidence of his power over Satan, Jesus says:
“How can anyone invade the house of a strong
man and seize his possessions unless he ?rst

41

ties up the strong man? Only then can he plunder his house. Whoever is not on my side is
against me, and whoever does not gather with
me scatters.” (Matthew 12:29, 30) The scribes
and Pharisees surely are against Jesus, thus
giving evidence that they are Satan’s agents.
They are scattering people away from the Son
of God, who is acting with Jehovah’s backing.
Jesus warns these satanic opposers: “All
things will be forgiven the sons of men, no
matter what sins they commit and what blasphemies they speak. But whoever blasphemes
against the holy spirit has no forgiveness forever but is guilty of everlasting sin.” (Mark 3:28,
29) Think of the implications of that for those
who are attributing to Satan what is plainly being done by God’s spirit!

 Who are with Jesus on his second tour of Galilee?
 Why do Jesus’ relatives attempt to lay hold of him?
 How do the scribes and Pharisees attempt to discredit Jesus’ miracles,
and how does Jesus refute them?
103

JESUS REBUKES THE PHARISEES
MATTHEW 12:33-50 MARK 3:31-35 LUKE 8:19-21

By denying that Jesus expels demons with
God’s power, the scribes and Pharisees are
at risk of blaspheming the holy spirit. Hence,
whose side will they take—God’s or Satan’s?
Jesus says: “Either you
make the tree ?ne and its
fruit ?ne or make the tree
rotten and its fruit rotten,
for by its fruit the tree is
known.”—Matthew 12:33.
It is foolish to charge
that the good fruit of casting out demons results
from Jesus’ serving Satan. As Jesus made plain in his Sermon on the
Mount, if the fruit is ?ne, the tree is ?ne, not
rotten. So, what does the Pharisees’ fruit, their
absurd accusations against Jesus, prove? That
they are rotten. Jesus tells them: “O?spring of
vipers, how can you speak good things when
you are wicked? For out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks.”—Matthew 7:16, 17;
12:34.
Yes, our words re?ect the condition of our
hearts and provide a basis for judgment. Hence,
Jesus says: “I tell you that men will render an account on Judgment Day for every unpro?table
saying that they speak; for by your words you
will be declared righteous, and by your words
you will be condemned.”—Matthew 12:36, 37.
Despite the powerful works Jesus is doing, the scribes and Pharisees demand more:
“Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
Whether they have personally seen him perform
miracles or not, there is ample eyewitness testimony of what he is doing. Jesus can thus tell
those Jewish leaders: “A wicked and adulterous generation keeps on seeking a sign, but no
104

sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah the
prophet.”—Matthew 12:38, 39.
Jesus does not leave them to wonder about
what he means: “Just as Jonah was in the belly of the huge ?sh for three days and three
nights, so the Son of man will be in the heart of
the earth for three days and three nights.” Jonah was swallowed by some sort of huge ?sh
but then came out as if resurrected. Jesus thus
foretells that he himself will die and on the third
day be raised. When that later occurs, the Jewish leaders reject “the sign of Jonah,” refusing to repent and change. (Matthew 27:63-66;
28:12-15) In contrast, the “men of Nineveh” did
repent after Jonah preached to them. So they
will condemn this generation. Jesus also says
that by her example, the queen of Sheba will
likewise denounce them. She desired to hear
Solomon’s wisdom and marveled at it. Now, Je-

?

JESUS TELLS OF “THE SIGN OF JONAH”
DISCIPLES ARE CLOSER THAN FAMILY

?

42

sus notes, “something more than Solomon is
here.”—Matthew 12:40-42.
Jesus likens the situation of this wicked generation to a man from whom an unclean spirit
comes out. (Matthew 12:45) Because the man
does not ?ll the void with good things, the wicked spirit returns with seven spirits more wicked
than himself and they possess him. Comparably, the Israelite nation had been cleansed and
had reformed—much like the man from whom
the unclean spirit came out. But the nation rejected God’s prophets, culminating in its opposing this one who clearly has God’s spirit,
Jesus. This shows the nation’s condition to be
worse than at its start.
While Jesus is speaking, his mother and his
brothers arrive and stand at the edge of the
crowd. Some sitting near him say: “Your mother
and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.” Jesus then shows how close he
feels to his disciples, who are like real brothers,
sisters, and mothers to him. Extending his hand
toward his disciples, he says: “My mother and
my brothers are these who hear the word of
God and do it.” (Luke 8:20, 21) He thus shows
that regardless of how precious the ties are that
bind him to his relatives, his relationship with
his disciples is even more precious. How refreshing it is for us to have such closeness with
our spiritual brothers, especially when others
doubt us or reproach us and our good works!

 In what way are the Pharisees like a rotten tree?
 What is “the sign of Jonah,” and how is it later rejected?
 How is the ?rst-century Israelite nation like the man from whom an unclean spirit came out?
 How does Jesus emphasize his close relationship with his disciples?
105

ILLUSTRATIONS ABOUT THE KINGDOM
MATTHEW 13:1-53 MARK 4:1-34 LUKE 8:4-18

Jesus is apparently in Capernaum when he rebukes the Pharisees. Later that day, he leaves
the house and walks to the nearby Sea of Galilee, where crowds gather. Jesus boards a boat,
pulls out from the shore, and begins teaching the people about the Kingdom of the heavens. He does so by means of a number of illustrations, or parables. His listeners are familiar
with many of the settings or features that Jesus
mentions, making it easier for them to grasp
various aspects of the Kingdom.
First, Jesus tells of a sower who is sowing
seed. Some seeds fall alongside the road and
are eaten by birds. Other seeds fall on rocky
ground where there is not much soil. The roots
that develop cannot reach down far, and the
new plants are scorched by the sun and wither.
Still other seeds fall among thorns, which choke
the young plants when they come up. Finally,
some seeds fall on ?ne soil. These seeds produce fruit, “this one 100 times more, that one
60, the other 30.”—Matthew 13:8.
In another illustration, Jesus likens the Kingdom to when a man sows seeds. In this case,
whether the man sleeps or is awake, the seeds
grow. Just how, “he does not know.” (Mark 4:27)
They grow by themselves and produce grain,
which he can harvest.
Jesus then tells a third illustration about
sowing. A man sows the right kind of seed,
but “while men were sleeping,” an enemy sows
weeds in among the wheat. The man’s slaves
ask if they should pull out the weeds. He replies:
“No, for fear that while collecting the weeds,

 When and where does Jesus speak
with illustrations to the crowds?

?

JESUS GIVES KINGDOM ILLUSTRATIONS

43

107

you uproot the wheat with them. Let both grow
together until the harvest, and in the harvest
season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the
weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them
up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.”
—Matthew 13:24-30.
Many who are listening to Jesus know about
farming. He also mentions something else commonly known, the tiny mustard seed. It grows
into a tree so large that birds can lodge in its
branches. About this seed, he says: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like a mustard grain that
a man took and planted in his ?eld.” (Matthew
13:31) Jesus, however, is not giving a botany lesson. He is illustrating spectacular growth,
how something very small can grow or expand
into something very large.
Then Jesus draws on a process that is familiar to many of his listeners. He likens the Kingdom of the heavens to “leaven that a woman
took and mixed with three large measures of
?our.” (Matthew 13:33) Although such leaven is
hidden from view, it permeates every part of the
dough and makes it rise. It produces considerable growth and changes that are not readily
discernible.
After giving these illustrations, Jesus dismisses the crowds and returns to the house
where he is staying. Soon his disciples come to
him, wanting to understand what he meant.
BENEFITING FROM JESUS’ ILLUSTRATIONS

The disciples have heard Jesus use illustrations before, but never to this extent. They put
to him the question: “Why do you speak to them
by the use of illustrations?”—Matthew 13:10.
One reason he does so is to ful?ll Bible proph-

ecy. Matthew’s account states: “Without an illustration he would not speak to them, in order
to ful?ll what was spoken through the prophet who said: ‘I will open my mouth with illustrations; I will proclaim things hidden since
the founding.’ ”—Matthew 13:34, 35; Psalm
78:2.
But there is more to Jesus’ use of illustrations. It serves to reveal the attitude of people.
Many of them are interested in Jesus simply as
a masterful storyteller and miracle worker. They
do not see him as someone to be obeyed as
Lord and to be unsel?shly followed. (Luke 6:46,
47) They do not want to be disturbed in their
view of things or their way of life. No, they do
not want the message to penetrate that deeply.
In answer to the disciples’ question, Jesus
says: “That is why I speak to them by the use of
illustrations; for looking, they look in vain, and
hearing, they hear in vain, nor do they get the
sense of it. And the prophecy of Isaiah is being
ful?lled in their case. It says: ‘. . .The heart of
this people has grown unreceptive.’ ”—Matthew
13:13-15; Isaiah 6:9, 10.
That does not, though, apply to all who are
hearing Jesus. He explains: “Happy are your
eyes because they see and your ears because
they hear. For truly I say to you, many prophets
and righteous men desired to see the things
you are observing but did not see them, and to
hear the things you are hearing but did not hear
them.”—Matthew 13:16, 17.
Yes, the 12 apostles and other loyal disciples have receptive hearts. Accordingly, Jesus
says: “To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the Kingdom of the heavens, but
to them it is not granted.” (Matthew 13:11) Be-

 What ?ve illustrations does Jesus ?rst present?
 Why does Jesus speak in illustrations?
 How do Jesus’ disciples show themselves to be di?erent from the crowds?
 How does Jesus explain the illustration of the sower?

cause of their sincere desire to understand, Jesus provides his disciples with an explanation
of the illustration of the sower.
“The seed is the word of God,” Jesus says.
(Luke 8:11) And the soil is the heart. That is a
key to getting the sense of his illustration.
Of the seed sown on the trampled-down
soil alongside the road, he explains: “The Devil comes and takes the word away from their
hearts so that they may not believe and be
saved.” (Luke 8:12) In speaking of the seed
sown on rocky ground, Jesus means the hearts
of people who receive the word with joy but the
word does not take root deep in their hearts.
“After tribulation or persecution has arisen on
account of the word,” they are stumbled. Yes,
when “a season of testing” comes, perhaps opposition from family members or others, they
fall away.—Matthew 13:21; Luke 8:13.

What of the seed that falls among the thorns?
Jesus tells his disciples that this refers to people who have heard the word. These, however,
are overcome by “the anxiety of this system
of things and the deceptive power of riches.” (Matthew 13:22) They had the word in their
heart, but now it is choked and becomes unfruitful.
The last type of soil that Jesus comments on
is the ?ne soil. This refers to those who hear the
word and accept it into their heart, getting the
real sense of it. With what result? They “bear
fruit.” Because of their circumstances, such as
age or health, not all can do the same; one produces 100 times more, another 60 times more,
and another 30 times more. Yes, blessings in
serving God come to “ones who, after hearing
the word with a ?ne and good heart, retain it
and bear fruit with endurance.”—Luke 8:15.

109

These words must be particularly impressive
to the disciples who have sought out Jesus to
get an explanation of his teachings! They now
have more than a surface grasp of the illustrations. Jesus wants them to understand his illustrations so that they, in turn, can impart truth to
others. “A lamp is not brought out to be put under a basket or under a bed, is it?” he asks. “Is
it not brought out to be put on a lampstand?”
Thus, Jesus advises: “Whoever has ears to listen, let him listen.”—Mark 4:21-23.
BLESSED WITH MORE INSTRUCTION

After receiving Jesus’ explanation of the illustration of the sower, the disciples want to
learn more. “Explain to us,” they request, “the
illustration of the weeds in the ?eld.”—Matthew
13:36.

In asking that, they display quite a di?erent
attitude from that of the rest of the crowd on
the beach. Evidently, those people hear but lack
the desire to learn the meaning behind the illustrations and their application. They are satis?ed with merely the outline of things set out
in the illustrations. Jesus contrasts that seaside
audience with his inquisitive disciples who have
come to him for more instruction, saying:
“Pay attention to what you are hearing. With
the measure that you are measuring out, you
will have it measured out to you, yes, you will
110

have more added to you.” (Mark 4:24) The disciples are paying attention to what they are hearing from him. They are measuring out to Jesus earnest interest and attention, and they are
blessed with more instruction, more enlightenment. Thus, in answer to his disciples’ inquiry about the illustration of the wheat and the
weeds, Jesus explains:
“The sower of the ?ne seed is the Son of man;
the ?eld is the world. As for the ?ne seed, these
are the sons of the Kingdom, but the weeds are
the sons of the wicked one, and the enemy who
sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is a conclusion of a system of things, and the reapers
are angels.”—Matthew 13:37-39.
After identifying each feature of his illustration, Jesus describes the outcome. He says that
at the conclusion of the system of things, the
reapers, or angels, will separate weedlike imitation Christians from the true “sons of the Kingdom.” “The righteous ones” will be gathered
and will eventually shine brightly “in the Kingdom of their Father.” And what about “the sons
of the wicked one”? The outcome for them will
be destruction, a just cause for “their weeping
and the gnashing of their teeth.”—Matthew 13:
41-43.
Jesus next blesses his disciples with three
more illustrations. First, he says: “The Kingdom

of the heavens is like a treasure, hidden in the
?eld, that a man found and hid; and because of
his joy, he goes and sells everything he has and
buys that ?eld.”—Matthew 13:44.
He continues: “The Kingdom of the heavens
is like a traveling merchant seeking ?ne pearls.
Upon ?nding one pearl of high value, he went
away and promptly sold all the things he had
and bought it.”—Matthew 13:45, 46.
With both illustrations, Jesus highlights a
person’s willingness to make sacri?ces for
what is truly valuable. The merchant promptly sells “all the things he had” to obtain the
one pearl of high value. Jesus’ disciples can
understand that example regarding a precious
pearl. And the man who ?nds treasure hidden
in a ?eld “sells everything” to possess it. In
both cases, something valuable is available,

something to be obtained and treasured. This
can be compared to the sacri?ces a person
makes to satisfy his spiritual need. (Matthew
5:3) Some of those hearing Jesus give these illustrations have already shown a willingness
to go to great lengths to satisfy their spiritual
need and to be his true followers.—Matthew 4:
19, 20; 19:27.
Finally, Jesus likens the Kingdom of the heavens to a dragnet that gathers up ?sh of every
kind. (Matthew 13:47) When the ?sh are separated, the good ones are kept in containers
but the unsuitable ones are thrown away. Jesus
says that it will be the same in the conclusion
of the system of things—the angels will separate the wicked from the righteous.
Jesus himself was doing a type of spiritual
?shing when he called his ?rst disciples to be
“?shers of men.” (Mark 1:17) However, he says
that his illustration about the dragnet applies in
the future, “in the conclusion of the system of
things.” (Matthew 13:49) So the apostles and
other disciples hearing Jesus can sense that
very interesting things are yet to develop.
Those who heard the illustrations given from
the boat are further enriched. Jesus is showing
his willingness to “explain all things privately to
his disciples.” (Mark 4:34) He is “like a man, the
master of the house, who brings out of his treasure store things both new and old.” (Matthew
13:52) In giving these illustrations, Jesus is not
showing o? his teaching ability. Rather, he is
sharing with his disciples truths that are like a
priceless treasure. He truly is a “public instructor” beyond compare.

 In the illustration of the wheat and the weeds, who or what is represented by the sower, the ?eld,
the ?ne seed, the weeds, the enemy, the harvest, and the reapers?
 What three additional illustrations does Jesus provide, and what can we learn from them?
111

JESUS SILENCES A STORM AT SEA
MATTHEW 8:18, 23-27 MARK 4:35- 41 LUKE 8:22-25

?

Jesus has had a long, tiring day. When evening
comes, he says to the disciples: “Let us cross
to the other shore,” which is across from the
area of Capernaum.—Mark 4:35.
Over on the eastern shore of the Sea of Galilee is the region of the Gerasenes. This area is
also known as the Decapolis. The cities of the
Decapolis are a center of Greek culture, though
many Jews live there too.
Jesus’ departure from Capernaum does not
go unnoticed. There are other boats that at
least start to cross the sea. (Mark 4:36) Actually, it is not that far across. The Sea of Galilee is like a large freshwater lake, being about
13 miles long and having a maximum width of
about 7 miles. But it is not shallow.
Though Jesus is a perfect man, he is understandably tired from his active ministry. So after they set sail, he lies down in the back of the
boat, puts his head on a pillow, and falls asleep.
Several of the apostles are well-quali?ed to
sail the boat, but this is not going to be an easy
trip. There are surrounding mountains, and the
surface of the Sea of Galilee is often quite
warm. At times, colder air in the mountains
rushes down and meets the warm surface water, creating sudden, violent windstorms on the
sea. This is what now occurs. Soon the waves
are dashing against the boat. It begins “to ?ll
up with water and to be in danger.” (Luke 8:23)
Still, Jesus remains asleep!

JESUS CALMS A STORM ON THE
SEA OF GALILEE

44

The seamen work frantically to steer the
boat, drawing on their past experience at maneuvering through storms. But this time is different. Fearing for their lives, they wake Jesus
up and exclaim: “Lord, save us, we are about to
perish!” (Matthew 8:25) The disciples are now
afraid that they are going to drown!
When Jesus wakes up, he says to the apostles: “Why are you so afraid, you with little
faith?” (Matthew 8:26) Then Jesus commands
the wind and the sea: “Hush! Be quiet!” (Mark 4:
39) The raging wind stops and the sea becomes
calm. (Mark and Luke tell of this impressive episode, ?rst emphasizing that Jesus miraculously calms the storm, and then they mention the
disciples’ lack of faith.)
Imagine the e?ect this has on the disciples!
They have just seen the sea go from a raging
storm to complete calm. An unusual fear grips
them. They say to one another: “Who really is
this? Even the wind and the sea obey him.” And
they come to the other side of the sea safely.
(Mark 4:41–5:1) Perhaps the other boats that
put to sea have been able to return to the western shore.
How reassuring it is to know that God’s Son
has power over the elements! When his full attention is directed toward our earth during his
Kingdom rule, all people will dwell in security,
for there will be no terrifying natural calamities!

 What natural features may contribute to the violent storm that occurs on the Sea of Galilee?
 In desperation, what do the disciples do?
 Why can we be reassured by this event?
113

POWER OVER MANY DEMONS
MATTHEW 8:28-34 MARK 5:1-20 LUKE 8:26-39

As the disciples return to shore after their
harrowing ordeal at sea, they experience quite
a shock. Two very ?erce men, both demonpossessed, come out from a nearby cemetery
and run toward Jesus! One of the men becomes
the focus of attention, possibly being more violent and having been controlled longer by the
demons.
This pitiful man has been going about naked.
Night and day, he is “crying out in the tombs
and in the mountains and slashing himself with
stones.” (Mark 5:5) He is so wild that people are
afraid to pass along that stretch of road. Some
have tried to bind him, but he tears the chains
apart and breaks the fetters o? his feet. Nobody has the strength to subdue him.
As the man approaches Jesus and falls at
his feet, the demons controlling him make him
scream: “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son
of the Most High God? I put you under oath
by God not to torment me.” Jesus shows that

he has authority over the demons, commanding: “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit.”
—Mark 5:7, 8.
In reality, many demons are possessing the
man. When Jesus asks, “What is your name?”
the reply is: “My name is Legion, because there
are many of us.” (Mark 5:9) A Roman legion is
made up of thousands of soldiers; hence, many
demons are ganging up on this man, reveling
in his su?erings. They beg Jesus “not to order
them to go away into the abyss.” They apparently realize what is ahead for both them and
their leader, Satan.—Luke 8:31.
Grazing nearby is a herd of about 2,000
swine, animals that are unclean according to
the Law and that Jews should not even own. The
demons say: “Send us into the swine, so that we
may enter into them.” (Mark 5:12) Jesus tells
them to go, and they enter the swine. At that,
all 2,000 of them stampede over the cli? and
drown in the sea below.

?

EXPELS DEMONS INTO SWINE

45

“Go home to your relatives, and report to them
all the things Jehovah has done for you and the
mercy he has shown you.”—Mark 5:19.
Jesus usually instructs those whom he heals
not to tell anyone because he does not want
people to reach conclusions about him on the
basis of sensational reports. In this case, the
formerly demonized man is living proof of Jesus’ power and can witness to people whom
Jesus may not reach personally. His testimony may also counteract any unfavorable report
about the loss of the swine. So the man goes
and starts proclaiming throughout the Decapolis what Jesus did for him.

When those taking care of the swine see
this, they rush to report the news in the city
and in the countryside. The people come out
to see what has happened. As they arrive, they
observe that the man from whom the demons
came out is now well and acting sanely. Why, he
is clothed and sitting at Jesus’ feet!
People who hear of this or see the man are
gripped with fear, not understanding what this
may mean for them. They urge Jesus to leave
their territory. While Jesus is boarding the boat
to leave, the formerly demonized man begs him
to let him come along. But Jesus tells the man:

 Why is attention focused on one of the two demon-possessed men?
 What do the demons know about their own future?
 For what reasons does Jesus have the formerly demonized man tell others about what Jesus did?
115

HEALED BY TOUCHING JESUS’ GARMENT
MATTHEW 9:18-22 MARK 5:21-34 LUKE 8:40- 48

News of Jesus’ return from the Decapolis
spreads among Jews living on the northwest
shore of the Sea of Galilee. Likely many have
heard that during the recent storm, Jesus
calmed the wind and the waters, and some may
know that he cured the demon-possessed men.
Hence, “a large crowd” gather by the sea, likely
in the area of Capernaum, to welcome Jesus
back. (Mark 5:21) As he steps ashore, they are
eager and expectant.
One of those anxious to see Jesus is Jairus,
a presiding o?cer of the synagogue, perhaps
the one in Capernaum. He falls at Jesus’ feet
and begs again and again: “My little daughter
is extremely ill. Please come and put your hands
on her so that she may get well and live.” (Mark
5:23) How will Jesus respond to Jairus’ fervent
plea to help his only daughter, who is just 12
years old and very precious to him?—Luke 8:42.
On his way to Jairus’ house, Jesus is confronted with another emotion-?lled situation.
Many of the people accompanying Jesus are excited, wondering whether they will be able to
see him perform another miracle. However, one
woman in the crowd is focused on her own severe health problem.
For 12 long years, this Jewish woman has
been su?ering from a ?ow of blood. She has
sought help from one doctor after another, using up all her money on treatments they have
recommended. But she has not been helped. In
fact, her problem has “become worse.”—Mark
5:26.
You can likely appreciate that her ailment, besides weakening her, is embarrassing and humiliating. One generally does not speak open-

116

ly about such a condition. Moreover, under the
Mosaic Law, a discharge of blood makes a woman ceremonially unclean. Anyone touching her
or her blood-stained garments needs to wash
and is unclean until the evening.—Leviticus 15:
25-27.
This woman has “heard the reports about Jesus,” and she now seeks him out. Because of her
uncleanness, she makes her way through the
crowd as inconspicuously as possible, saying to
herself: “If I touch just his outer garments, I will
get well.” When she does touch the fringe of his
garment, she immediately senses that her ?ow
of blood has stopped! She has “been healed of
the grievous sickness.”—Mark 5:27-29.
Jesus then says: “Who touched me?” How
do you think the woman feels at hearing those
words? Peter protests with an implied reproof
of Jesus: “The crowds are hemming you in and
pressing against you.” So why did Jesus ask,
“Who touched me?” Jesus explains: “Someone
touched me, for I know that power went out of
me.” (Luke 8:45, 46) Yes, the healing that occurred has drawn on Jesus’ vitality.
Realizing that she has not escaped notice,
the woman falls down before Jesus, frightened
and trembling. In front of all, she tells the truth
about her illness and that she has just been
cured. Jesus kindly comforts her: “Daughter,
your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and
be healed from your grievous sickness.”—Mark
5:34.
Clearly, the One whom God has chosen to rule
the earth is a warm, compassionate person who
not only cares for people but also has the power to help them!

?

A WOMAN IS HEALED BY TOUCHING
JESUS’ GARMENT

46

 Why do the people gather to greet Jesus as he returns to the area of Capernaum?
 What problem does one woman have, and why is she seeking help from Jesus?
 How is the woman healed, and what comfort does Jesus give her?
117

A YOUNG GIRL LIVES AGAIN!
MATTHEW 9:18, 23-26 MARK 5:22-24, 35- 43 LUKE 8:40- 42, 49-56

Jairus sees that the woman with the ?ow of
blood was healed by Jesus. Surely, Jesus can
help his daughter too, though he feels that ‘by
now his daughter must be dead.’ (Matthew 9:
18) Could it be that she can still be helped?
While Jesus is still speaking with the woman he has healed, some men arrive from Jairus’ home and tell him: “Your daughter died!”
They add: “Why bother the Teacher any longer?”
—Mark 5:35.
What devastating news! This man, so highly
respected in the community, is now completely helpless. His only daughter has died. Jesus,
however, overhears the report, and turning to
Jairus, he says encouragingly: “Have no fear,
only exercise faith.”—Mark 5:36.
Jesus then accompanies Jairus back to his
home. On arriving, they ?nd a great commotion.

Those who have gathered there are weeping,
wailing, and beating themselves in grief. Jesus
steps inside and makes the startling statement:
“The child has not died but is sleeping.” (Mark
5:39) On hearing this, the people laugh at Jesus. They know that the girl really is dead. Yet,
using his God-given powers, Jesus will show
that it is possible for people to be brought back
from death just as they can be awakened from
a deep sleep.
Jesus now sends everyone outside except
for Peter, James, John, and the dead girl’s parents. Jesus takes these ?ve with him and goes
to where the girl is lying. Taking her by the
hand, he says: “ ‘Tali·tha cumi,’ which, when
translated, means: ‘Little girl, I say to you, “Get
up!” ’ ” (Mark 5:41) Immediately, she rises and
begins walking. Imagine the ecstasy that Jairus and his wife feel on seeing this! Providing further evidence that the girl really is alive,
Jesus directs that she be given something to
eat.
On earlier occasions, Jesus ordered those
whom he healed not to publicize what he had
done for them, and he does so again with these
parents. Nevertheless, the delighted parents
and others spread the news “into all that region.” (Matthew 9:26) Would you not talk about
it excitedly if you had seen one of your loved
ones raised from the dead? This is the second
recorded resurrection Jesus performs.

 What report does Jairus receive, and how does Jesus encourage him?
 When Jesus and Jairus arrive at the home, what is the situation there?
 Why does Jesus say that the dead child is only sleeping?
118

?

JESUS RESURRECTS JAIRUS’ DAUGHTER

47

PERFORMING MIRACLES, BUT REJECTED EVEN IN NAZARETH
MATTHEW 9:27-34; 13:54-58 MARK 6:1-6

?

It has been a full day for Jesus. After a voyage
from the region of the Decapolis, he healed the
woman with the ?ow of blood and he resurrected Jairus’ daughter. But the day is not over. As
Jesus leaves Jairus’ home, two blind men follow
him, shouting: “Have mercy on us, Son of David.”—Matthew 9:27.
By calling Jesus “Son of David,” these men
express their belief that Jesus is heir to the
throne of David and thus the Messiah. Jesus
seems to ignore their cries, perhaps to see
whether they will be persistent, and they are.
When Jesus enters a house, the two men follow
him inside. Jesus asks them: “Do you have faith
that I can do this?” They answer con?dently:
“Yes, Lord.” At that, Jesus touches their eyes
and says: “According to your faith let it happen
to you.”—Matthew 9:28, 29.
Suddenly they can see! As he has earlier instructed others, Jesus directs them not to publicize what he did. But ?lled with gladness, they
later talk about him far and wide.
As these two men are leaving, people bring
in a man who cannot speak because he is
demon-possessed. Jesus expels the demon,
and instantly the man begins to talk. The
crowds marvel at this, saying: “Never has anything like this been seen in Israel.” Pharisees
are also present. They cannot deny the miracles, so they repeat their charge as to the
source of Jesus’ works: “It is by the ruler of the

JESUS HEALS THE BLIND AND THE SPEECHLESS
? PEOPLE IN NAZARETH REJECT HIM

48

demons that he expels the demons.”—Matthew
9:33, 34.
Shortly thereafter, Jesus heads back to his
hometown, Nazareth, now accompanied by his
disciples. About a year earlier, he taught in the
synagogue there. The people initially marveled
at what he said, but they later took o?ense at
his teaching and tried to kill him. Now Jesus
again tries to help his former neighbors.
On the Sabbath, he returns to the synagogue
to teach. Many are astounded, even asking:
“Where did this man get this wisdom and these
powerful works?” They say: “Is this not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and
his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and
Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?
Where, then, did he get all of this?”—Matthew
13:54-56.
The people feel that Jesus is just a local
man. ‘We saw him grow up,’ they think, ‘so how
can he be the Messiah?’ Consequently, despite
all the evidence—including Jesus’ great wisdom
and powerful works—they reject him. Because
of their familiarity with Jesus, even his relatives stumble at him, causing him to observe: “A
prophet is not without honor except in his home
territory and in his own house.”—Matthew 13:57.
Indeed, Jesus is amazed at their lack of faith.
So he does not perform any miracles there “except to lay his hands on a few sick people and
cure them.”—Mark 6:5, 6.

 By addressing Jesus as “Son of David,” what do the blind men show they believe?
 The Pharisees fall back on what explanation for Jesus’ miracles?
 What reception does Jesus receive in Nazareth, and why?
121

PREACHING IN GALILEE AND TRAINING THE APOSTLES
MATTHEW 9:35–10:15 MARK 6:6-11 LUKE 9:1-5

Jesus has been preaching intensively for some
two years. Is it now time to let up and take
it easy? On the contrary, Jesus expands his
preaching activity by setting out “on a tour of all
the cities and villages [of Galilee], teaching in
their synagogues and preaching the good news
of the Kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of in?rmity.” (Matthew 9:
35) What he sees convinces him of the need to
expand the preaching work. But how will he accomplish this?
As he travels, Jesus sees people in need
of spiritual healing and comfort. They are like
sheep without a shepherd, skinned and thrown
about. He feels pity for them and tells his disciples: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the work-

ers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the
harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”
—Matthew 9:37, 38.
Jesus knows what will help. He summons the
12 apostles and divides them into pairs, making six teams of preachers. He then gives them
clear instructions: “Do not go o? into the road
of the nations, and do not enter any Samaritan city; but instead, go continually to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. As you go, preach,
saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn
near.’ ”—Matthew 10:5-7.
The Kingdom they are to preach about is the
one Jesus spoke of in the model prayer. ‘The
Kingdom has drawn near’ in the sense that
God’s designated King, Jesus Christ, is present.

?

What, though, will prove that his disciples truly
represent this Kingdom government? Jesus empowers them to cure the sick and even raise the
dead, all of this at no charge. How, then, will the
apostles care for their own needs, such as their
daily food?
Jesus tells his disciples not to make their
own material preparations for this preaching
tour. They are not to get gold, silver, or copper
for their purses. They do not even need a food
pouch for the trip nor extra undergarments or
sandals. Why not? Jesus assures them: “The
worker deserves his food.” (Matthew 10:10) The
people they ?nd who appreciate their message
will help care for the disciples’ basic needs. Jesus says: “Wherever you enter into a home, stay
there until you leave that place.”—Mark 6:10.
Jesus also gives instructions on how to approach householders with the Kingdom message, saying: “When you enter the house, greet
the household. If the house is deserving, let the
peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not
deserving, let the peace from you return upon
you. Wherever anyone does not receive you or
listen to your words, on going out of that house
or that city, shake the dust o? your feet.”—Matthew 10:12-14.
It could even be that an entire city or village
rejects their message. What does that mean for
such a place? Jesus reveals that severe adverse

? JESUS AGAIN TOURS GALILEE
HE SENDS THE APOSTLES OUT TO PREACH

49

judgment will result. He explains: “Truly I say to
you, it will be more endurable for the land of
Sodom and Gomorrah on Judgment Day than
for that city.”—Matthew 10:15.

 When does Jesus begin another preaching tour of Galilee, and what does he note about the people?
 How does Jesus send out the 12 apostles, and with what instructions?
 In what sense has ‘the Kingdom drawn near’?
123

PREPARED TO PREACH DESPITE PERSECUTION
MATTHEW 10:16–11:1 MARK 6:12, 13 LUKE 9:6

Jesus provides his apostles with excellent instructions on how to carry out the preaching
work as they go forth in pairs. He does not stop
there, however. He kindly warns them about opposers: “Look! I am sending you out as sheep
among wolves . . . Be on your guard against
men, for they will hand you over to local courts
and they will scourge you in their synagogues.
And you will be brought before governors and
kings for my sake.”—Matthew 10:16-18.
Yes, Jesus’ followers may encounter severe
persecution, yet he reassuringly promises
them: “When they hand you over, do not become anxious about how or what you are to
speak, for what you are to speak will be given
you in that hour; for the ones speaking are not
just you, but it is the spirit of your Father that
speaks by you.” Jesus continues: “Brother will
hand brother over to death, and a father his
child, and children will rise up against parents
and will have them put to death. And you will be
hated by all people on account of my name,
but the one who has endured to the end will be
saved.”—Matthew 10:19-22.
Because the preaching is of primary importance, Jesus emphasizes the need for his followers to be discreet so as to remain free to car-

124

ry out this work. He says: “When they persecute
you in one city, ?ee to another; for truly I say to
you, you will by no means complete the circuit
of the cities of Israel until the Son of man arrives.”—Matthew 10:23.
What outstanding instructions, warnings,
and encouragement Jesus gives to his 12 apostles! You can appreciate, though, that these
words are also meant for those who will share in
the preaching work after Jesus’ death and resurrection. This is shown by his saying that his
disciples will be “hated by all people,” not just
by those to whom the apostles are being sent
to preach. Furthermore, we do not read of the
apostles’ being brought before governors and
kings during this short preaching campaign in
Galilee nor of their being delivered up to death
by family members.
Clearly, Jesus has the future in mind in saying
these things to the apostles. Consider his statement that his disciples will not complete their
circuit of preaching “until the Son of man arrives.” Jesus is indicating that his disciples will
not complete the preaching about God’s Kingdom before the glori?ed King Jesus Christ arrives as God’s judge.
While carrying out the preaching work, the

?

apostles should not be surprised to face opposition, for Jesus says: “A disciple is not above
his teacher, nor a slave above his master.” Jesus’ point is clear. He faces ill-treatment and
persecution for preaching God’s Kingdom, and
so will they. Yet Jesus urges: “Do not become
fearful of those who kill the body but cannot
kill the soul; rather, fear him who can destroy
both soul and body in Gehenna.”—Matthew 10:
24, 28.
In this, Jesus set the example. He fearlessly
endured death rather than compromise his loyalty to the one with all power, Jehovah. It is Almighty God who can destroy a person’s “soul”
(his future prospects for life) or who can resurrect him to enjoy everlasting life. How reassuring this must be to the apostles!
Jesus illustrates God’s loving care for his followers in this way: “Two sparrows sell for a
coin of small value, do they not? Yet not one of
them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge. . . . So have no fear; you are
worth more than many sparrows.”—Matthew 10:
29, 31.
The message Jesus’ disciples preach will divide households, some family members accepting it and others not. “Do not think I came to
bring peace to the earth,” Jesus explains. Yes,
it takes courage for a family member to em-

JESUS TRAINS AND SENDS OUT
THE APOSTLES

50

brace Bible truth. “Whoever has greater a?ection for father or mother than for me is not worthy of me,” Jesus observes, “and whoever has
greater a?ection for son or daughter than for
me is not worthy of me.”—Matthew 10:34, 37.
Yet, some will receive his disciples favorably.
He says: “Whoever gives one of these little ones
only a cup of cold water to drink because he is
a disciple, I tell you truly, he will by no means
lose his reward.”—Matthew 10:42.
Well-equipped with Jesus’ instructions, warnings, and encouragement, the apostles head
out “through the territory from village to village,
declaring the good news and performing cures
everywhere.”—Luke 9:6.

 Jesus provides what warnings for his disciples?
 What encouragement and comfort does he give them?
 Why do Jesus’ instructions also apply to us today?
125

MURDER DURING A BIRTHDAY PARTY
MATTHEW 14:1-12 MARK 6:14-29 LUKE 9:7-9

While Jesus’ apostles are carrying out their
ministry in Galilee, the one who introduced Jesus has no such liberty. John the Baptist is still
in prison after almost two years.
John had openly declared that it was wrong
for King Herod Antipas to take Herodias, the
wife of his half brother Philip, as his own. Herod had divorced his ?rst wife to marry Herodias. According to the Mosaic Law, which Herod
claims to follow, this marriage is adulterous and
illegal. In response to John’s reproof, Herod had
John thrown into prison, perhaps at the urging
of Herodias.
Herod is at a loss as to what to do with John,
because the people ‘take him for a prophet.’
(Matthew 14:5) Herodias, though, feels no such
indecision. She is “nursing a grudge against
him,” and in fact, she keeps seeking to have him
put to death. (Mark 6:19) Finally, the opportunity arises.
Shortly before the Passover of 32 C.E., Herod
arranges a large celebration for his birthday.
All of Herod’s top-ranking o?cials and army of?cers, as well as the leading citizens of Galilee,
assemble for the party. During the festivities,
Salome, the young daughter of Herodias by her
former husband Philip, is sent in to dance for
the guests. The men are enthralled by her performance.
Highly pleased with his stepdaughter, Herod
says to her: “Ask me for whatever you want, and

I will give it to you.” He even swears: “Whatever
you ask me for, I will give it to you, up to half
my kingdom.” Before answering, Salome goes
out and says to her mother: “What should I ask
for?”—Mark 6:22-24.
This is the opportunity that Herodias has
been seeking! “The head of John the Baptizer,” she promptly answers. Immediately, Salome
comes back to Herod with her request: “I want
you to give me right away on a platter the head
of John the Baptist.”—Mark 6:24, 25.
This greatly distresses Herod, but his guests
have heard his oath to Salome. He is embarrassed not to grant it, even if this means murdering an innocent man. Hence, Herod sends a
bodyguard to the prison with the grisly instructions. Soon the bodyguard returns with John’s
head on a platter. He gives it to Salome, who
takes it to her mother.
When John’s disciples hear what has happened, they come and remove his body and
bury it. Then they report the matter to Jesus.
Later, when Herod hears of Jesus’ healing
people and casting out demons, he is disturbed. He wonders if the man doing these
things—Jesus—is actually John the Baptist now
“raised up from the dead.” (Luke 9:7) So Herod
Antipas greatly desires to see Jesus. This is certainly not to hear Jesus’ preaching. Rather, Herod wants to see Jesus to con?rm whether his
concerns are well-founded or not.

 Why is John the Baptist in prison?
 How does Herodias ?nally manage to have John killed?
 After John’s death, why does Herod Antipas want to see Jesus?
126

?

HEROD HAS JOHN THE BAPTIST BEHEADED

51

FEEDING THOUSANDS WITH A FEW LOAVES AND FISH
MATTHEW 14:13-21 MARK 6:30- 44 LUKE 9:10-17 JOHN 6:1-13

The 12 apostles have enjoyed a preaching tour
throughout Galilee, and they relate to Jesus “all
the things they had done and taught.” Understandably, they are tired. Yet, they do not even
have time to eat because so many people are
coming and going. So Jesus says: “Come, you
yourselves, privately into an isolated place and
rest up a little.”—Mark 6:30, 31.
They board a boat, probably near Capernaum, and head for an out-of-the-way place east
of the Jordan River beyond Bethsaida. Many
people, however, see them leave, and others
learn about it. Together they run along the
shore and are there when the boat lands.
Leaving the boat, Jesus sees the crowd and
is moved with pity, for they are as sheep without a shepherd. So he starts “to teach them

128

many things” about the Kingdom. (Mark 6:34)
He also heals “those needing a cure.” (Luke 9:
11) As time passes, the disciples say to him:
“The place is isolated and the hour is already
late; send the crowds away, so that they may
go into the villages and buy themselves food.”
—Matthew 14:15.
Jesus replies: “They do not have to leave; you
give them something to eat.” (Matthew 14:16)
Although Jesus already knows what he is going
to do, he tests Philip with the question: “Where
will we buy bread for these people to eat?” Philip is the one to ask, for he is from nearby Bethsaida. Still, buying bread is not the solution.
There are about 5,000 men. And the total may
be double that, counting women and children!
Philip responds: “Two hundred denarii [a denarius is a day’s wage] worth of bread is not
enough for each of them to get even a little.”
—John 6:5-7.
Perhaps to show the impossibility of feeding them all, Andrew comments: “Here is a little boy who has ?ve barley loaves and two
small ?sh. But what are these among so many?”
—John 6:9.
It is springtime, just before the Passover of
32 C.E., and green grass covers the hillside. Jesus has his disciples tell the people to recline on
the grass in groups of 50 and of 100. He takes
the ?ve loaves and two ?sh and gives thanks to
God. Then he breaks the loaves and divides up
the ?sh. Jesus gives these to the disciples to
distribute to the people. Amazingly, all the people eat until they are satis?ed!
Later, Jesus tells his disciples: “Gather together the fragments left over, so that nothing
is wasted.” (John 6:12) They are able to ?ll 12
baskets with the leftovers gathered!

?

JESUS FEEDS 5,000 MEN

52

 Why does Jesus seek a place of privacy for his apostles?
 Where do Jesus and the disciples go, and what do they encounter there?
 What do the disciples urge Jesus to do, but how does he care for the people?
129

A RULER WHO CAN CONTROL THE ELEMENTS
MATTHEW 14:22-36 MARK 6:45-56 JOHN 6:14-25

?

Jesus’ miraculous ability to feed thousands has
a strong impact on the people. They conclude
that “this really is the Prophet who was to come
into the world,” the Messiah, and that he certainly would make a desirable ruler. (John 6:14;
Deuteronomy 18:18) So the people plan to seize
Jesus and make him king.
Jesus, however, realizes what the people are
planning. He dismisses the crowds and instructs his disciples to get back in their boat.
Their route and destination? They are to head
toward Bethsaida and then on to Capernaum.
As for Jesus himself, he withdraws to the mountain to pray alone that night.
In the light of the moon shortly before dawn,
Jesus observes the boat from a distance. The
waves of the sea are being whipped up by a
strong wind, and the apostles are ‘struggling
to row, for the wind is against them.’ (Mark 6:
48) Jesus descends from the mountain and begins walking over the waves toward them. By
now “they had rowed about three or four miles.”
(John 6:19) The disciples observe Jesus seeming to pass by them, and they cry out in fear: “It
is an apparition!”—Mark 6:49.
Jesus comfortingly responds: “Take courage!
It is I; do not be afraid.” But Peter says: “Lord,
if it is you, command me to come to you over
the waters.” Jesus answers: “Come!” At that, Peter gets out of the boat and actually walks on
water toward Jesus. But when he looks at the

? PEOPLE WANT TO MAKE JESUS KING
JESUS WALKS ON WATER, CALMS THE WIND

53

windstorm, Peter becomes afraid and starts to
sink. He cries out: “Lord, save me!” Stretching
out his hand, Jesus catches hold of Peter and
says: “You with little faith, why did you give way
to doubt?”—Matthew 14:27-31.
Peter and Jesus get into the boat, and the
wind abates. The disciples are amazed, but
should they be? If they had grasped “the meaning of the loaves,” the miracle Jesus performed
a few hours earlier when he fed thousands, it
should not have been amazing that he could
walk on water and calm the wind. Now they
react by doing obeisance to him, saying: “You
really are God’s Son.”—Mark 6:52; Matthew
14:33.
Soon they reach the beautiful, fruitful plain
of Gennesaret, south of Capernaum. They anchor the boat and then come ashore. The people recognize Jesus, and together with others
from the surrounding country, they bring the
sick to him. When these just touch the fringe of
Jesus’ outer garment, they are made completely well.
Meanwhile, the crowd that had witnessed the
miraculous feeding of the thousands discover
that Jesus has left. So when little boats from Tiberias arrive, the people get aboard and sail to
Capernaum to ?nd Jesus. When they do, they
ask: “Rabbi, when did you get here?” (John 6:
25) With good reason, Jesus rebukes them, as
we will see.

 After Jesus feeds the thousands, what do the people want to do to him?
 Why should the disciples not be amazed that Jesus can walk on water and calm the wind?
 What happens after Jesus reaches the shore near Capernaum?
131

JESUS—“THE BREAD OF LIFE”
JOHN 6:25- 48

Over on the eastern side of the Sea of Galilee, Jesus miraculously fed thousands and then
escaped when they wanted to make him king.
That night he walked on the stormy sea and rescued Peter, who also walked on water but began to sink when his faith wavered. Jesus also
calmed the wind, perhaps saving his disciples
from shipwreck.
Now Jesus is back on the western side of the
sea, in the area of Capernaum. Those he miraculously fed ?nd him and inquire: “When did you
get here?” Rebuking them, Jesus says that they
are looking for him in the hope of being fed
again. He urges them to “work, not for the food
that perishes, but for the food that remains for
everlasting life.” So they ask: “What must we do
to carry out the works of God?”—John 6:25-28.
They may be thinking of works set out in the
Law, but Jesus points to the work of highest
value: “This is the work of God, that you exercise faith in the one whom he sent.” The people,
however, do not exercise such faith in Jesus, despite all that he has done. They demand that he
perform a sign so that they may believe in him.
“What work are you doing?” they ask. “Our forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as
it is written: ‘He gave them bread from heaven
to eat.’ ”—John 6:29-31; Psalm 78:24.
Regarding their request for a sign, Jesus directs the people to the real Source of miraculous provisions: “I say to you, Moses did not
give you the bread from heaven, but my Father
gives you the true bread from heaven. For the
bread of God is the one who comes down from
heaven and gives life to the world.” Not grasping his point, they plead: “Lord, always give
us this bread.” (John 6:32-34) What “bread,”
though, does Jesus mean?
132

He explains: “I am the bread of life. Whoever
comes to me will not get hungry at all, and whoever exercises faith in me will never get thirsty
at all. But as I said to you, you have even seen
me and yet do not believe. . . . I have come down
from heaven to do, not my own will, but the will
of him who sent me. This is the will of him who
sent me, that I should lose none out of all those
whom he has given me, but that I should resurrect them on the last day. For this is the will of
my Father, that everyone who recognizes the
Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life.”—John 6:35-40.
This causes quite a stir, and the Jews begin
murmuring about him. How can he claim that he
is “the bread that came down from heaven”?
(John 6:41) To them, he is just a son of human parents from the Galilean city of Nazareth.
The people ask: “Is this not Jesus the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know?”
—John 6:42.
“Stop murmuring among yourselves,” Jesus
responds. “No man can come to me unless the
Father, who sent me, draws him, and I will resurrect him on the last day. It is written in the
Prophets: ‘They will all be taught by Jehovah.’
Everyone who has listened to the Father and
has learned comes to me. Not that any man
has seen the Father, except the one who is from
God; this one has seen the Father. Most truly
I say to you, whoever believes has everlasting
life.”—John 6:43-47; Isaiah 54:13.
When earlier he spoke with Nicodemus, Jesus mentioned everlasting life and linked that
with faith in the Son of man, stating: “Everyone exercising faith in [God’s only-begotten
Son] might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” (John 3:15, 16) But now he is speak-

?

ing to a much larger audience, telling them
that he has a role in their gaining everlasting
life, which neither the manna nor the bread
commonly available in Galilee can provide. So
how can everlasting life be gained? Jesus re-

JESUS IS “THE BREAD FROM HEAVEN”

54

peats his words: “I am the bread of life.”—John
6:48.
This discussion regarding the bread from
heaven continues, reaching a climax while Jesus teaches in a synagogue in Capernaum.

 Considering recent events, why is the request for Jesus to produce a sign inappropriate?
 How do the Jews react to Jesus’ saying that he is the true “bread from heaven”?
 Why is the bread that Jesus speaks of superior to manna or literal bread?
133

JESUS’ WORDS SHOCK MANY
JOHN 6:48-71

In a synagogue in Capernaum, Jesus is teaching about his being the true bread from heaven. His comments evidently add to what he said
to the people who returned from the eastern
side of the Sea of Galilee, those who ate from
the loaves and ?sh provided there.
Jesus continues his discussion, saying: “Your
forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness and
yet they died.” In contrast, he explains: “I am
the living bread that came down from heaven.
If anyone eats of this bread he will live forever;
and for a fact, the bread that I will give is my
?esh in behalf of the life of the world.”—John 6:
48-51.
In the spring of 30 C.E., Jesus told Nicodemus that God loved the world so much that he
provided his Son as a Savior. Jesus now stresses the need to eat of his ?esh by exercising faith
in the sacri?ce he will make. That is the way to
receive everlasting life.
However, the people take exception to Jesus’
words. “How can this man give us his ?esh to
eat?” they ask. (John 6:52) Jesus wants them
to understand that he means this ?guratively,
not literally. What he adds shows this to be his
meaning.
“Unless you eat the ?esh of the Son of man
and drink his blood, you have no life in yourselves. Whoever feeds on my ?esh and drinks
my blood has everlasting life, . . . for my ?esh
is true food and my blood is true drink. Whoever
feeds on my ?esh and drinks my blood remains
in union with me.”—John 6:53-56.
Imagine how o?ensive that may sound to
Jewish listeners! They might think that Jesus is suggesting cannibalism or a violation of
God’s law against consuming blood. (Genesis
134

9:4; Leviticus 17:10, 11) But Jesus is not referring to eating ?esh or drinking blood literally.
He is showing that all who want everlasting life
must exercise faith in the sacri?ce that he is to
make when he o?ers up his perfect human body
and pours out his lifeblood. Yet, even many of
his disciples do not understand this teaching.
Some react: “This speech is shocking; who can
listen to it?”—John 6:60.
Because Jesus realizes that some of his disciples are murmuring, he asks: “Does this stumble you? What, therefore, if you should see the
Son of man ascending to where he was before? . . . The sayings that I have spoken to you
are spirit and are life. But there are some of
you who do not believe.” With that, many disciples leave and no longer follow him.—John 6:
61-64.
So Jesus addresses his 12 apostles with the
question: “You do not want to go also, do you?”
Peter responds: “Lord, whom shall we go away
to? You have sayings of everlasting life. We have
believed and have come to know that you are
the Holy One of God.” (John 6:67-69) What an
expression of loyalty, even though at this point
Peter and the other apostles do not fully understand what Jesus is teaching on this matter!
While pleased by Peter’s response, Jesus observes: “I chose you twelve, did I not? Yet one of
you is a slanderer.” (John 6:70) Jesus is speaking about Judas Iscariot. It is possible that at
this point Jesus detects that Judas is starting
down a wrong course.
Still, it certainly brings Jesus satisfaction to
know that Peter and the other apostles are not
dissuaded from following him and from sharing
in the lifesaving work that he is doing.

?

? EATING HIS FLESH AND DRINKING HIS BLOOD
MANY ARE STUMBLED AND STOP FOLLOWING HIM

55

 How does Jesus give his ?esh to people, and how can someone ‘eat Jesus’ ?esh’?
 Why are people shocked at what Jesus says about his ?esh and blood, but what is he emphasizing?
 When many quit following Jesus, what is Peter’s reaction?
135

WHAT REALLY DEFILES A PERSON?
MATTHEW 15:1-20 MARK 7:1-23 JOHN 7:1

As the Passover of 32 C.E. approaches, Jesus
is busy teaching in Galilee. Then he likely heads
to Jerusalem for the Passover, as God’s Law requires. However, Jesus does so cautiously because the Jews are seeking to kill him. (John
7:1) After that he returns to Galilee.
Jesus is probably in Capernaum when Pharisees and scribes come to him from Jerusalem.
Why do they make this trip? They are looking for
grounds on which to accuse Jesus of a religious
o?ense. They ask: “Why do your disciples overstep the tradition of the men of former times?
For example, they do not wash their hands when
about to eat a meal.” (Matthew 15:2) God never
told his people to observe this ritual of ‘washing their hands up to the elbow.’ (Mark 7:3) Yet
the Pharisees consider not doing so to be a serious o?ense.
Rather than answer their accusation directly,
Jesus points to how they willfully break God’s
Law. “Why do you overstep the commandment
of God because of your tradition?” he asks
them. “For example, God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who
speaks abusively of his father or mother be put
to death.’ But you say, ‘Whoever says to his
father or mother: “Whatever I have that could
bene?t you is a gift dedicated to God,” he need
not honor his father at all.’ ”—Matthew 15:3-6;
Exodus 20:12; 21:17.
The Pharisees claim that money, property, or
anything dedicated as a gift to God belongs to
the temple, so it cannot be used for a di?erent
purpose. In reality, though, the person is still
in possession of the dedicated gift. For example, a son might say that his money or property is “corban,” a gift dedicated to God or to the
temple, as if the temple now has prior claim to
136

the gift. The money or property is still the son’s
to use, yet he claims that it cannot be used to
help his aged and needy parents. He thereby
evades his responsibility toward them.—Mark
7:11.
Jesus is rightly indignant at this twisting
of God’s Law and says: “You have made the
word of God invalid because of your tradition.
You hypocrites, Isaiah aptly prophesied about
you when he said: ‘This people honor me with
their lips, but their hearts are far removed from
me. It is in vain that they keep worshipping
me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’ ” The Pharisees have no response to Jesus’ strong criticism. So he calls the crowd to
come near. “Listen and get the sense of it,” he
says. “It is not what enters into a man’s mouth
that de?les him, but it is what comes out of his
mouth that de?les him.”—Matthew 15:6-11; Isaiah 29:13.
Later when in a house, the disciples ask Jesus: “Do you know that the Pharisees were
stumbled at hearing what you said?” He replies: “Every plant that my heavenly Father did
not plant will be uprooted. Let them be. Blind
guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man
guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
—Matthew 15:12-14.
Jesus seems surprised when, on behalf of
the disciples, Peter asks for clari?cation about
what de?les a man. Jesus responds: “Are you
not aware that whatever enters into the mouth
passes through the stomach and is discharged
into the sewer? However, whatever comes out
of the mouth comes from the heart, and those
things de?le a man. For example, out of the
heart come wicked reasonings, murders, adulteries, sexual immorality, thefts, false testimo-

?

nies, blasphemies. These are the things that de?le a man; but to take a meal with unwashed
hands does not de?le a man.”—Matthew 15:
17-20.
Jesus is not discouraging normal hygiene,
nor is he arguing that a person need not wash

JESUS EXPOSES HUMAN TRADITIONS

56

his hands before preparing food or eating a
meal. Rather, he is condemning the hypocrisy of
religious leaders who try to bypass God’s righteous laws by resorting to human traditions.
The fact is, wicked deeds originating in the
heart are what de?le a man.

 The Pharisees and scribes make what accusation?
 As Jesus points out, how do the Pharisees willfully overstep God’s Law?
 What are the things that actually de?le a man?
137

JESUS CURES A GIRL AND A DEAF MAN
MATTHEW 15:21-31 MARK 7:24-37

Having denounced the Pharisees for their selfserving traditions, Jesus leaves with his disciples. He heads for the regions of Tyre and Sidon in Phoenicia, many miles to the northwest.
Jesus ?nds a house to stay in but does not
want people to know that he is there. Yet, even
here he cannot escape notice. A woman of
Greek descent who was born in this area ?nds
Jesus and begins begging: “Have mercy on me,
Lord, Son of David. My daughter is cruelly demon possessed.”—Matthew 15:22; Mark 7:26.
After a while, Jesus’ disciples urge him:
“Send her away, because she keeps crying out
after us.” In response, Jesus explains his reason for ignoring her: “I was not sent to anyone
except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
The woman does not give up, though. She approaches and falls down before Jesus, pleading: “Lord, help me!”—Matthew 15:23-25.
Apparently to test her faith, Jesus alludes
to the Jews’ negative view of people of other
nationalities: “It is not right to take the bread
of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
(Matthew 15:26) In speaking of “little dogs,” or
puppies, Jesus reveals his tender feelings toward non-Jews. His facial expression and compassionate voice must also convey those feelings.
Rather than taking o?ense, the woman picks
up on the reference to Jewish prejudices and
humbly observes: “Yes, Lord, but really the little
dogs do eat of the crumbs falling from the table
of their masters.” Jesus recognizes her good
heart condition and says: “O woman, great is
your faith; let it happen to you as you wish.”

138

(Matthew 15:27, 28) And it does, even though
the girl is not right there! When the woman returns home, she ?nds her daughter lying on
the bed, completely healed—“the demon was
gone”!—Mark 7:30.
From the region of Phoenicia, Jesus and his
disciples head across the country toward the
upper Jordan River. They apparently cross the
Jordan somewhere north of the Sea of Galilee
and go into the region of the Decapolis. There,
they go up on a mountain, but the crowds ?nd
them. The people bring to Jesus their lame,
maimed, blind, and speechless. They lay these
sick ones at Jesus’ feet, and he cures them.
Amazed, the people glorify the God of Israel.
Jesus gives special attention to one man who
is deaf and has a speech problem. You can understand how he must feel in a large crowd.
Perhaps noting how nervous this man is, Jesus
takes him away from the crowd. When they are
alone, Jesus indicates what he is going to do
for him. He puts his ?ngers into the man’s ears
and, after spitting, touches the man’s tongue.
Then looking toward heaven, Jesus utters a Semitic expression that means “Be opened.” At
that, the man’s hearing is restored, and he is
able to speak normally. Jesus does not want
this publicized, preferring that people believe
in him based on what they personally see and
hear.—Mark 7:32-36.
Jesus’ power to perform such cures has a
deep e?ect on the observers, who are “astounded beyond measure.” They say: “He has done all
things well. He even makes the deaf hear and
the speechless speak.”—Mark 7:37.

?

JESUS HEALS A PHOENICIAN WOMAN’S DAUGHTER
? HE CURES A MAN WHO IS DEAF AND SPEECHLESS

57

 Why does Jesus not immediately heal the Phoenician woman’s daughter?
 After leaving the region of Phoenicia, where do Jesus and his disciples go?
 How does Jesus show compassion when dealing with the man who is deaf and speechless?
139

HE MULTIPLIES LOAVES AND WARNS ABOUT LEAVEN
MATTHEW 15:32–16:12 MARK 8:1-21

Great crowds have ?ocked to Jesus in the region of the Decapolis, on the east side of the
Sea of Galilee. They have come to hear him and
to be healed, bringing along large baskets, or
hampers, of provisions.
In time, however, Jesus tells his disciples: “I
feel pity for the crowd, because they have already stayed with me for three days and they
have nothing to eat. If I send them o? to their
homes hungry, they will give out on the road,
and some of them are from far away.” The disciples ask: “From where will anyone get enough
bread in this isolated place to satisfy these people?”—Mark 8:2-4.
Jesus responds: “How many loaves do you
have?” The disciples say: “Seven, and a few
small ?sh.” (Matthew 15:34) Then Jesus has
the people recline on the ground. He takes the
loaves and the ?sh, prays to God, and gives
them to his disciples to distribute. Amazingly,
all eat to satisfaction. The leftovers collected
?ll seven large provision baskets, even though

140

about 4,000 men, as well as women and children, have eaten!
After Jesus sends the crowds away, he and
the disciples cross by boat to Magadan, on the
western shore of the Sea of Galilee. Here, Pharisees accompanied by some of the sect of the
Sadducees try to test Jesus, asking him to display a sign from heaven.
Realizing what their motives are, Jesus replies: “When evening falls, you say, ‘It will be
fair weather, for the sky is ?re-red,’ and in the
morning, ‘It will be wintry, rainy weather today,
for the sky is ?re-red but gloomy.’ You know
how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but
the signs of the times you cannot interpret.”
(Matthew 16:2, 3) Then Jesus tells the Pharisees and Sadducees that no sign will be given
them except the sign of Jonah.
Jesus and his disciples get in a boat and
head toward Bethsaida on the northeast shore
of the sea. En route, the disciples discover that
they forgot to bring enough bread. They have
just one loaf. Having in mind his recent encounter with the Pharisees and the Sadducean supporters of Herod, Jesus warns: “Keep your eyes
open; look out for the leaven of the Pharisees
and the leaven of Herod.” The disciples mistakenly think that his mention of leaven refers to
their forgetting to bring bread. Noting their mistake, Jesus says: “Why do you argue over your
having no bread?”—Mark 8:15-17.
Jesus had recently provided bread for thousands of people. So the disciples should know
that he is not concerned about a lack of literal
loaves. “Do you not remember,” he asks, “when
I broke the ?ve loaves for the 5,000 men, how
many baskets full of fragments you collected?”
They answer: “Twelve.” Continuing, Jesus says:

?

“When I broke the seven loaves for the 4,000
men, how many large baskets full of fragments
did you take up?” They reply: “Seven.”—Mark 8:
18-20.
Jesus asks: “How is it you do not discern that
I did not speak to you about bread?” He adds:
“Watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadducees.”—Matthew 16:11.

? JESUS FEEDS 4,000 MEN
HE WARNS ABOUT THE LEAVEN OF THE PHARISEES

58

Finally, the disciples get the point. Leaven
is used to cause fermentation and make bread
rise. Jesus is here using leaven as a symbol of
corruption. He is warning the disciples to be on
guard against “the teaching of the Pharisees
and Sadducees,” which has a corrupting e?ect.
—Matthew 16:12.

 Why do people ?ock to Jesus?
 When Jesus mentions leaven, what do the disciples mistakenly think?
 What does Jesus mean by the expression “the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees”?
141

WHO IS THE SON OF MAN?
MATTHEW 16:13-27 MARK 8:22-38 LUKE 9:18-26

Jesus and his disciples arrive at Bethsaida. The
people then bring a blind man to him and beg
Jesus to touch the man to heal him.
Taking the man by the hand, Jesus leads him
outside the village. After spitting on the man’s
eyes, Jesus asks him: “Do you see anything?”
The man replies: “I see people, but they look
like trees walking about.” (Mark 8:23, 24) Laying his hands on the man’s eyes, Jesus restores
his sight. He then sends home the man who
can now see clearly, instructing him not to enter into the village.
Next, Jesus and his disciples travel northward to the region of Caesarea Philippi. It is a
long ascent, covering about 25 miles. The village is at an elevation of 1,150 feet above sea
level, with snowcapped Mount Hermon rising to
the northeast. The trip probably takes a couple
of days.
At one point along the way, Jesus goes o? to
pray alone. Only about nine or ten months remain before his death, and Jesus is concerned
about his disciples. Many have recently left o?
following him, and others apparently are confused or disappointed. They may be wondering
why he rejected the people’s e?orts to make
him king or why he would not provide a sign to
show unquestionably who he really is.
When the disciples come to where he is praying, Jesus asks: “Who are men saying the Son
of man is?” They reply: “Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah, and still others Jeremiah or
one of the prophets.” Yes, people think that Jesus may actually be one of those men raised
from the dead. To draw out their thinking, Jesus
asks his disciples: “You, though, who do you say
I am?” Peter quickly replies: “You are the Christ,
the Son of the living God.”—Matthew 16:13-16.
142

Jesus says that Peter can be happy that God
revealed this to him, adding: “I say to you: You
are Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of the Grave will not
overpower it.” Jesus means that he himself will
build a congregation and that even the Grave
will not hold captive its members if they maintain a faithful course on earth. He promises Peter: “I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of
the heavens.”—Matthew 16:18, 19.
Jesus does not give Peter ?rst place among
the apostles, nor does Jesus make him the
foundation of the congregation. Jesus himself
is the Rock upon which his congregation will be
built. (1 Corinthians 3:11; Ephesians 2:20) Peter, though, is to receive three keys. He will have
the privilege of opening, as it were, the opportunity for groups of people to enter the Kingdom of the heavens.

? JESUS HEALS A BLIND MAN
PETER TO RECEIVE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM
JESUS FORETELLS HIS DEATH AND RESURRECTION
?

?

Peter would use the ?rst key at Pentecost 33 C.E., showing repentant Jews and proselytes what they must do to be saved. He would
use the second to open to believing Samaritans the opportunity to enter God’s Kingdom.
Then, in 36 C.E., Peter would use the third to
extend that opportunity to uncircumcised Gentiles, Cornelius and others.—Acts 2:37, 38; 8:
14-17; 10:44-48.
In this discussion, Jesus’ apostles are troubled when he foretells the su?erings and death
that he will soon face in Jerusalem. Not grasping that Jesus is to be resurrected to heavenly life, Peter takes him aside and rebukes him,
saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not
have this happen to you at all.” But Jesus turns
his back and answers: “Get behind me, Satan!
You are a stumbling block to me, because you
think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
—Matthew 16:22, 23.
Jesus now calls others besides the apostles
and explains that it will not be easy to be his follower. He says: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his
torture stake and keep following me. For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and for the sake
of the good news will save it.”—Mark 8:34, 35.
Yes, to prove worthy of Jesus’ favor, his followers must be courageous and self-sacri?cing.
Jesus states: “Whoever becomes ashamed

59

of me and my words in this adulterous and
sinful generation, the Son of man will also be
ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of
his Father with the holy angels.” (Mark 8:38)
Yes, when Jesus thus comes, “he will repay each
one according to his behavior.”—Matthew 16:27.

 What views do some people have as to Jesus’ identity? How do the apostles view him?
 Peter receives what keys, and how are they to be used?
 What correction does Peter receive, and why?
143

THE TRANSFIGURATION—A VIEW OF CHRIST IN GLORY
MATTHEW 16:28–17:13 MARK 9:1-13 LUKE 9:27-36

While Jesus is teaching the people in the region
of Caesarea Philippi, which is about 15 miles
from Mount Hermon, he makes a startling announcement to his apostles: “Truly I say to you
that there are some of those standing here who
will not taste death at all until ?rst they see the
Son of man coming in his Kingdom.”—Matthew
16:28.
The disciples must wonder what Jesus
means. About a week later, he takes three of
the apostles—Peter, James, and John—with him
up to a lofty mountain. It may well be nighttime, for the three men are sleepy. While Jesus
is praying, he is trans?gured before them. The
apostles see his face shine as the sun and see
his garments become brilliant as light, glitteringly white.
Then, two ?gures, identi?ed as “Moses and
Elijah,” appear. They start talking to Jesus
about his ‘departure that is to occur at Jerusalem.’ (Luke 9:30, 31) His departure evidently
refers to Jesus’ death and subsequent resurrection, which he recently spoke of. (Matthew
16:21) This conversation proves that contrary
to what Peter urged, Jesus’ humiliating death is
not something to be avoided.
Fully awake now, the three apostles watch
and listen in amazement. This is a vision, yet it
appears so real that Peter begins to get personally involved in the scene, saying: “Rabbi, it is
?ne for us to be here. So let us erect three tents,
one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
(Mark 9:5) Does Peter want the tents set up so
that the vision will be prolonged for some time?

144

While Peter is speaking, a bright cloud covers them and a voice from the cloud says:
“This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.” At hearing God’s voice,
the frightened apostles fall on their faces, but
Jesus urges them: “Get up. Have no fear.” (Matthew 17:5-7) When they do, the three apostles
see no one except Jesus. The vision has ended.
When it is day and they are descending from the
mountain, Jesus commands: “Tell the vision to
no one until the Son of man is raised up from
the dead.”—Matthew 17:9.
Elijah’s appearance in the vision raises a
question. “Why,” the apostles ask, “do the
scribes say that Elijah must come ?rst?” Jesus
replies: “Elijah has already come, and they did
not recognize him.” (Matthew 17:10-12) Jesus is
speaking about John the Baptist, who ful?lled
a role similar to Elijah’s. Elijah prepared the way
for Elisha, and John did so for Christ.
How strengthening this vision is to Jesus and
to the apostles! It is a preview of Christ’s Kingdom glory. Thus the disciples saw “the Son
of man coming in his Kingdom,” as Jesus had
promised. (Matthew 16:28) While on the mountain, they were “eyewitnesses of his magnificence.” Though the Pharisees wanted a sign to
prove that Jesus was to be God’s chosen King,
he would not give them one. But Jesus’ close
disciples were allowed to see Jesus’ trans?guration, which con?rms Kingdom prophecies. Thus, Peter could later write: “We have
the prophetic word made more sure.”—2 Peter
1:16-19.

?

? TRANSFIGURATION VISION
APOSTLES HEAR GOD’S VOICE

60

 Before their death, how do some see Jesus coming in his Kingdom?
 In the vision, what do Moses and Elijah talk about with Jesus?
 Why is the trans?guration vision strengthening to Christ’s followers?
145

JESUS HEALS A DEMON-POSSESSED BOY
MATTHEW 17:14-20 MARK 9:14-29 LUKE 9:37- 43

When Jesus, Peter, James, and John descend
from the mountain, they meet a large crowd.
Something is wrong. Scribes are gathered
around the disciples, arguing with them. The
people are quite surprised to see Jesus, and
they run to greet him. “What are you arguing
about with them?” he asks.—Mark 9:16.
A man from the crowd kneels before Jesus
and explains: “Teacher, I brought my son to you
because he has a speechless spirit. Wherever it
seizes him, it throws him to the ground, and he
foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth and
loses his strength. I asked your disciples to expel it, but they were not able to do so.”—Mark
9:17, 18.
Apparently, the scribes are criticizing the disciples because of their failure to heal the boy,
perhaps ridiculing their e?orts. So instead of

replying to the distraught father, Jesus addresses the crowd, saying: “O faithless and
twisted generation, how long must I continue
with you? How long must I put up with you?”
These strong words certainly apply to the
scribes who have been making trouble for his
disciples in his absence. Turning to the distressed father, Jesus says: “Bring him here to
me.”—Matthew 17:17.
As the boy approaches Jesus, the demon
that possesses him knocks him to the ground
and throws him into a violent convulsion. The
boy keeps rolling on the ground, foaming at
the mouth. “How long has this been happening to him?” Jesus asks the father. He answers:
“From childhood on, and often it would throw
him into the ?re and also into the water to destroy him.” The man pleads: “If you can do any-

?

STRONG FAITH NEEDED TO HEAL A DEMON-POSSESSED BOY

thing, have pity on us and help us.”—Mark 9:
21, 22.
The father is desperate, because even Jesus’ disciples have not been able to help. In response to the man’s desperate appeal, Jesus
gives the encouraging assurance: “That expression, ‘If you can’! Why, all things are possible for
the one who has faith.” Immediately the father
cries out: “I have faith! Help me out where I need
faith!”—Mark 9:23, 24.
Jesus notices the crowd running toward him.
With all of these looking on, Jesus rebukes the
demon: “You speechless and deaf spirit, I order
you, get out of him and do not enter into him
again!” In departing, the demon causes the boy
to scream and have many convulsions. Then
the boy lies there motionless. Seeing this, many
people say: “He is dead!” (Mark 9:25, 26) But
when Jesus takes the boy’s hand, he rises and is
“cured from that hour.” (Matthew 17:18) Understandably, the people are astonished at what
Jesus is doing.
Earlier, when Jesus sent the disciples forth
to preach, they were able to expel demons. So
now, privately in a house, they ask him: “Why
could we not expel it?” Jesus explains that it
was because of their lack of faith, saying: “This
kind can come out only by prayer.” (Mark 9:28,
29) Strong faith along with prayer for God’s empowering help was needed to expel the powerful demon.

61

Jesus concludes: “Truly I say to you, if you
have faith the size of a mustard grain, you will
say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’
and it will move, and nothing will be impossible
for you.” (Matthew 17:20) How powerful faith
can be!
Obstacles and di?culties that block progress
in Jehovah’s service may seem to be as insurmountable and irremovable as a literal mountain. Yet, if we cultivate faith, we can overcome
such mountainlike obstacles and di?culties.

 What situation does Jesus ?nd upon returning from the mountain?
 Why were the disciples unable to expel the demon from the boy?
 How powerful can our faith become?
147

AN IMPORTANT LESSON IN HUMILITY
MATTHEW 17:22–18:5 MARK 9:30-37 LUKE 9:43- 48

After the trans?guration and the healing of a
demon-possessed boy in the region of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus heads toward Capernaum. He travels privately, just with his disciples,
so that the crowds do not “get to know about
it.” (Mark 9:30) This gives him further opportunity to prepare his disciples for his death and
for the work they will then do. “The Son of
man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands,”
he explains, “and they will kill him, and on the
third day he will be raised up.”—Matthew 17:
22, 23.
That idea should not strike his disciples as
new. Jesus spoke earlier about his being killed,
though Peter refused to believe that this would
happen. (Matthew 16:21, 22) And three apostles saw the trans?guration and heard the discussion about Jesus’ “departure.” (Luke 9:31)
His followers now become “very much grieved”
over what Jesus is saying, even though they do
not understand the full impact of his words.
(Matthew 17:23) Still, they are afraid to question him further about it.
In time they come into Capernaum, Jesus’
base of activity and the hometown of a number
of the apostles. There, men who collect the temple tax approach Peter. Perhaps attempting to
accuse Jesus of failing to pay taxes, they ask:
“Does your teacher not pay the two drachmas
[temple] tax?”—Matthew 17:24.
“Yes,” Peter replies. Back at the house, Jesus is already aware of what has occurred. So
rather than wait for Peter to bring the matter up, Jesus asks: “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive duties or head tax? From their sons or
from the strangers?” Peter answers: “From the
strangers.” Thereupon Jesus observes: “Real148

ly, then, the sons are tax-free.”—Matthew 17:
25, 26.
Jesus’ Father is the King of the universe
and the One who is worshipped at the temple.
Hence, God’s Son is not
legally required to pay
the temple tax. “But that
we do not cause them to
stumble,” Jesus says, “go
to the sea, cast a ?shhook, and take the ?rst
?sh that comes up, and when you open its
mouth, you will ?nd a silver coin [a stater, or
tetradrachma]. Take that and give it to them for
me and you.”—Matthew 17:27.
Soon the disciples are together, and they
have a question for Jesus about who would
be greatest in the Kingdom. These same men
were recently afraid to question Jesus about his
coming death, yet now they are not afraid to
approach him about their future. Jesus knows
what they are thinking. It is something they
had already been arguing about as they trailed
behind him on their trip back to Capernaum.
So he asks: “What were you arguing about on
the road?” (Mark 9:33) Embarrassed, the disciples keep silent, because they were arguing
among themselves about who is greatest. Finally, the apostles present to Jesus the question
that they have been discussing: “Who really is
greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens?”—Matthew 18:1.
It seems incredible that the disciples would
have such an argument after nearly three
years of observing and hearing Jesus. However, they are imperfect. And they have grown
up in a religious climate where position and

?

? JESUS AGAIN FORETELLS HIS DEATH
HE PAYS TAX WITH COIN FROM FISH’S MOUTH
? WHO IS TO BE GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM?

62

rank are stressed. Moreover, Peter had recently heard Jesus promise him certain “keys” of the
Kingdom. Might he thus feel superior? James
and John may feel similarly, having been eyewitnesses of Jesus’ trans?guration.
Whatever the case, Jesus acts to correct their
attitude. He calls a child, stands him in their
midst, and tells the disciples: “Unless you turn
around and become as young children, you will
by no means enter into the Kingdom of the
heavens. Therefore, whoever will humble himself like this young child is the one who is the
greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens; and
whoever receives one such young child on the
basis of my name receives me also.”—Matthew
18:3-5.
What a marvelous method of teaching! Jesus does not become angry with his disciples
and call them greedy or ambitious. Rather, he
uses an object lesson. Young children do not
have high status or prominence at all. Jesus
thus shows that his disciples need to develop
this view of themselves. Then Jesus concludes
the lesson for his followers, saying: “The one
who conducts himself as a lesser one among all
of you is the one who is great.”—Luke 9:48.

 On returning to Capernaum, Jesus repeats what important fact, and how do his disciples receive this?
 Why is Jesus not under obligation to pay the temple tax, but why does he do so?
 What might contribute to the disciples’ concern about position, and how does Jesus correct them?
149

JESUS OFFERS COUNSEL ABOUT STUMBLING AND SIN
MATTHEW 18:6-20 MARK 9:38-50 LUKE 9:49, 50

Jesus has just illustrated the attitude that his
followers should have. They should view themselves as children, lowly and without status. The
disciples should ‘receive such young children
on the basis of his name and thus receive Jesus also.’—Matthew 18:5.
The apostles had recently been arguing over
who is the greatest, so they may take Jesus’ words as a reproof. Now the apostle John
brings up something else that has just happened: “We saw someone expelling demons
by using your name, and we tried to prevent
him, because he is not following with us.”—Luke
9:49.
Does John view the apostles as the only ones
who are authorized to heal others or to expel
demons? If so, how is it that this Jewish man is
successful in casting out wicked spirits? John
seems to feel that the man should not be performing powerful works because he is not accompanying Jesus and the apostles.
To John’s surprise, Jesus says: “Do not try to
prevent him, for there is no one who will do a
powerful work on the basis of my name who
will quickly be able to say anything bad about
me. For whoever is not against us is for us.
And whoever gives you a cup of water to drink
because you belong to Christ, I tell you truly,
he will by no means lose his reward.”—Mark 9:
39-41.
No, at this time the man does not need to accompany Christ in order to be on Jesus’ side.
The Christian congregation is yet to be formed,
so the fact that the man is not traveling with Jesus does not mean that he is an opposer or promoting a false religion. The man obviously has
faith in Jesus’ name, and what Jesus says indicates that the man will not lose his reward.
150

On the other hand, it would be serious if
the man was stumbled by the words and actions of the apostles. Jesus observes: “Whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have
faith, it would be better for him if a millstone
that is turned by a donkey were put around his
neck and he were pitched into the sea.” (Mark
9:42) Jesus then says that his followers should

remove even something as precious as a hand,
a foot, or an eye if that causes them to stumble. It is better to be without such a cherished
thing and enter into God’s Kingdom than to hold
on to it and end up in Gehenna (Valley of Hinnom). The apostles have likely seen this valley
near Jerusalem where refuse is burned, so they
can understand it as representing permanent
destruction.
Jesus also warns: “See that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that
their angels in heaven always look upon the
face of my Father.” How precious are such “lit-

?
?

tle ones” to his Father? Jesus tells of a man who
has 100 sheep but loses one. The man leaves
the 99 to search for that lost one, and on ?nding it he rejoices more over it than over the 99.
Jesus adds: “It is not a desirable thing to my Father who is in heaven for even one of these little ones to perish.”—Matthew 18:10, 14.
Perhaps thinking of his apostles’ arguing
about who would be greatest, Jesus urges
them: “Have salt in yourselves, and keep peace
with one another.” (Mark 9:50) Salt makes
foods more palatable. Figurative salt makes
what one says easier to accept and thus can
help to preserve peace, which arguing does not
do.—Colossians 4:6.
At times, serious issues will arise, and Jesus tells how to handle them. “If your brother
commits a sin,” Jesus says, “go and reveal his
fault between you and him alone. If he listens
to you, you have gained your brother.” What if
he does not listen? “Take along with you one or
two more,” Jesus advises, “so that on the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter
may be established.” If that does not resolve
the matter, they are to speak to “the congregation,” that is, to responsible elders who can
render a decision. What if the sinner still does
not listen? “Let him be to you just as a man of
the nations and as a tax collector,” people with
whom Jews would not fellowship.—Matthew 18:
15-17.

COUNSEL ABOUT STUMBLING
IF A BROTHER COMMITS A SIN

63

Congregation overseers need to adhere to
God’s Word. If they ?nd a sinner guilty and
needing discipline, their judgment ‘will already
be bound in heaven.’ But when they ?nd one
innocent, it will have been “loosened in heaven.” These guidelines will prove helpful once the
Christian congregation is formed. In such serious deliberations, Jesus says: “Where there
are two or three gathered together in my name,
there I am in their midst.”—Matthew 18:18-20.

 Why is the man casting out demons not to be viewed as an opposer?
 How serious is the matter of stumbling a little one, and how does Jesus illustrate the importance of such
little ones?
 What guidance does Jesus provide about the course to follow if a brother commits a sin?
151

THE NEED TO FORGIVE
MATTHEW 18:21-35

Peter has heard Jesus’ advice on how to handle
a di?culty between brothers by trying to settle
it one-on-one. Yet, Peter seems to want to quantify the number of times one should make such
an e?ort.
Peter asks: “Lord, how many times is my
brother to sin against me and am I to forgive
him? Up to seven times?” Some religious leaders teach that one should grant forgiveness up
to three times. So Peter may feel that he would
be very generous if he forgave a brother “up to
seven times.”—Matthew 18:21.
However, the idea of keeping such a record of
wrongs is not in the spirit of Jesus’ teaching. So
he corrects Peter: “I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to 77 times.” (Matthew 18:22)
That, in other words, means inde?nitely. There
should be no limit to the number of times Peter
forgives his brother.
Jesus then tells Peter and the others an illustration to impress on them their obligation
to be forgiving. It is about a slave who fails
to imitate his merciful master. The king wants
to settle accounts with his slaves. One slave
who owes the enormous debt of 10,000 talents
[60,000,000 denarii] is brought to him. There
is no possible way he can pay that debt. So the
king orders that the slave, his wife, and his children be sold and payment be made. At that, the
slave falls down at his master’s feet and begs:
“Be patient with me, and I will pay back everything to you.”—Matthew 18:26.
The king is moved with pity and mercifully
cancels the slave’s huge debt. Once the king has
done so, this slave goes and ?nds a fellow slave
who owes him 100 denarii. He grabs the other slave and begins choking him, saying: “Pay
back whatever you owe.” But that fellow slave
152

?

? FORGIVE SEVEN TIMES?
ILLUSTRATION OF THE UNMERCIFUL SLAVE

64

you in the same way if each of you does not forgive your brother from your heart.”—Matthew
18:32-35.
What a lesson that should teach us about forgiveness! God has forgiven us a large debt of
sin. Whatever transgression a Christian brother
commits against us is small in comparison. And
Jehovah forgives us not once but thousands of
times. Can we not forgive our brother a number
of times, even if we have a cause for complaint?
As Jesus taught in the Sermon on the Mount,
God will “forgive us our debts, as we also have
forgiven our debtors.”—Matthew 6:12.
falls at the feet of the slave to whom he is in
debt, begging: “Be patient with me, and I will
pay you back.” (Matthew 18:28, 29) However,
the slave whose debt the king forgave does not
imitate his master. He has his fellow slave, who
owes much less, thrown into prison until he can
pay what he owes.
Jesus then relates that other slaves who see
this unmerciful treatment go and tell the master, who angrily summons the slave and says:
“Wicked slave, I canceled all that debt for you
when you pleaded with me. Should you not
also have shown mercy to your fellow slave as
I showed mercy to you?” The angry king delivers the unmerciful slave over to the jailers
until he repays all that he owes. Jesus concludes: “My heavenly Father will also deal with

 What prompts Peter to ask about forgiving his brother, and why may he consider it generous
to forgive someone seven times?
 How does the king’s response to his slave’s plea for mercy di?er from the way that slave deals with
his fellow slave?
 What lesson should we learn from Jesus’ illustration?
153

TEACHING WHILE TRAVELING TO JERUSALEM
MATTHEW 8:19-22 LUKE 9:51-62 JOHN 7:2-10

For some time, Jesus has con?ned his activity
mainly to Galilee, where he has found a better response than in Judea. Besides, when he
was in Jerusalem and healed a man on the Sabbath, “the Jews began seeking all the more to
kill him.”—John 5:18; 7:1.
It is now the autumn of 32 C.E., and the Festival of Tabernacles (or, Booths) is near. This
festival is celebrated for seven days, followed by
a solemn assembly on the eighth day. The festival marks the end of the agricultural year and is
a time of great rejoicing and thanksgiving.
Jesus’ half brothers—James, Simon, Joseph,
and Judas—urge him: “Leave here and go into
Judea.” Jerusalem is the religious center of the
country. During the three annual festivals, the
city is crowded. Jesus’ brothers reason: “No
one does anything in secret when he seeks to
be known publicly. If you are doing these things,
show yourself to the world.”—John 7:3, 4.
Actually, these four brothers are “not exercising faith in him” as the Messiah. Yet, they
want those gathered at the festival to see him
do some powerful works. Jesus, aware of the
danger, tells them: “The world has no reason
to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear
witness about it that its works are wicked. You
go up to the festival; I am not yet going up to
this festival, because my time has not yet fully
come.”—John 7:5-8.
Some days after Jesus’ brothers depart with
the main body of travelers, Jesus and his disciples go secretly, out of the public eye. They take
the more direct route through Samaria, rather
than the common one near the Jordan River. Jesus and his disciples will need accommodations
in Samaria, so he sends messengers ahead to
make preparations. The people in one place re154

fuse to welcome them or show ordinary hospitality because Jesus is heading for Jerusalem
for the Jewish festival. James and John angrily
ask: “Lord, do you want us to call ?re down from
heaven and annihilate them?” (Luke 9:54) Jesus rebukes them for even suggesting that, and
they travel on.
While on the road, a scribe says to Jesus:
“Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.” Jesus responds: “Foxes have dens and birds of
heaven have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.” (Matthew 8:19, 20)
He is pointing out that the scribe will experience
hardship if he becomes Jesus’ follower. And it
seems that the scribe is too proud to accept this

?

mode of life. Each of us, thus, can ask, ‘How
willing am I to follow Jesus?’
To another man, Jesus says: “Be my follower.” The man replies: “Lord, permit me ?rst to
go and bury my father.” Knowing the man’s circumstances, Jesus says: “Let the dead bury
their dead, but you go and declare abroad the
Kingdom of God.” (Luke 9:59, 60) The father evidently has not yet died. If he had, it is unlikely
that his son would be here talking with Jesus.
The son is not prepared to put the Kingdom of
God ?rst in his life.
As they move down the road toward Jerusalem, another man tells Jesus: “I will follow
you, Lord, but ?rst permit me to say good-bye
to those in my household.” Jesus answers: “No
man who has put his hand to a plow and looks
at the things behind is well-suited for the Kingdom of God.”—Luke 9:61, 62.

? HOW JESUS’ BROTHERS VIEW HIM
HOW IMPORTANT IS KINGDOM SERVICE?

65

Those who want to be Jesus’ true disciples must have their eyes focused on Kingdom
service. If the plowman does not keep looking straight ahead, a furrow will likely become
crooked. If he sets the plow down in order to
see what is behind, the work in the ?eld will fall
behind. Similarly, anyone who looks behind at
this old system of things may well stumble o?
the road leading to eternal life.

 How do Jesus’ four half brothers feel about him?
 Why do the Samaritans turn Jesus away, and
what do James and John want to do?
 What three conversations does Jesus have on the
road, and what is he emphasizing about service
to God?

S E CT I O N

4
JESUS’
LATER MINISTRY
IN JUDEA

“BEG THE MASTER OF
THE HARVEST TO
SEND OUT WORKERS.”
—LUKE 10:2

IN JERUSALEM FOR THE FESTIVAL OF TABERNACLES
JOHN 7:11-32

Jesus has become well-known during the years
since his baptism. Thousands of Jews have seen
his miracles, and reports about his works have
spread throughout the land. Now, at the Festival of Tabernacles (or, Booths) in Jerusalem,
many are looking for him.
Opinions about Jesus are greatly divided.
“He is a good man,” some say. Others respond:
“He is not. He misleads the crowd.” (John 7:12)
Much of this subdued talk occurs during the
opening days of the festival. Yet no one has the
courage to speak out publicly in Jesus’ behalf
because there is widespread fear of how the
Jewish leaders will react.
Partway through the festival, Jesus shows up
at the temple. Many of the people are amazed
at his marvelous ability to teach. He never attended the rabbinic schools, so the Jews wonder: “How does this man have such a knowledge
of the Scriptures when he has not studied at the
schools?”—John 7:15.
“What I teach is not mine,” Jesus explains,
“but belongs to him who sent me. If anyone desires to do His will, he will know whether the
teaching is from God or I speak of my own originality.” (John 7:16, 17) Jesus’ teaching is in
harmony with God’s Law, so it should be obvious that he is seeking God’s glory, not his
own.
Then Jesus says: “Moses gave you the Law,
did he not? But not one of you obeys the
Law. Why are you seeking to kill me?” Some in
the crowd, probably visitors from outside the
city, are unaware of such e?orts. It seems inconceivable to them that anyone would want to
kill a teacher like him. Hence, they conclude
that something must be wrong with Jesus for
him to make that claim. “You have a demon,”
158

they say. “Who is seeking to kill you?”—John 7:
19, 20.
Actually, a year and a half earlier, the Jewish leaders wanted to kill Jesus after he had
healed a man on the Sabbath. Jesus now uses
a thought-provoking line of reasoning and exposes their unreasonableness. He calls attention to the fact that under the Law, a baby boy
is to be circumcised on the eighth day, even if
it is the Sabbath. Then he asks: “If a man receives circumcision on a sabbath so that the
Law of Moses may not be broken, are you violently angry at me because I made a man completely well on a sabbath? Stop judging by the
outward appearance, but judge with righteous
judgment.”—John 7:23, 24.
Residents of Jerusalem who are aware of the
situation comment: “This is the man they [the
rulers] are seeking to kill, is it not? And yet see!
he is speaking in public, and they say nothing to him. Have the rulers come to know for
certain that this is the Christ?” Why, then, do
the people not believe that Jesus is the Christ?
“We know where this man is from; yet when the
Christ comes, no one is to know where he is
from,” they say.—John 7:25-27.
Right there at the temple, Jesus answers:
“You know me and you know where I am from.
And I have not come of my own initiative, but the
One who sent me is real, and you do not know
him. I know him, because I am a representative
from him, and that One sent me.” (John 7:28, 29)
In response to that clear statement, there is an
attempt to lay hold of Jesus, either to imprison
him or to kill him. However, the attempt fails because it is not yet time for Jesus to die.
Many, though, put faith in Jesus, as they
should. He has walked on water, calmed the

?

winds, miraculously fed thousands with a few
loaves and ?sh, cured the sick, made the lame
walk, opened the eyes of the blind, cured lepers, and even raised the dead. Yes, they have
good reason to ask: “When the Christ comes, he

JESUS TEACHES AT THE TEMPLE

66

will not perform more signs than this man has
done, will he?”—John 7:31.
When the Pharisees hear the crowd saying
these things, they and the chief priests send out
o?cers to arrest Jesus.

 When Jesus arrives at the festival, what are people saying about him?
 Jesus uses what reasoning to show that he is not violating the Law of God?
 Why do many put faith in Jesus?
159

“NEVER HAS ANY MAN SPOKEN LIKE THIS”
JOHN 7:32-52

Jesus is still in Jerusalem for the Festival of
Tabernacles (or, Booths). He is pleased that
“many of the crowd put faith in him.” That does
not please the religious leaders, however. They
send o?cers, who function as religious police,
to arrest him. (John 7:31, 32) Yet, Jesus does
not try to hide.
Rather, Jesus keeps on teaching publicly in
Jerusalem, saying: “I will be with you a little
while longer before I go to the One who sent me.
You will look for me, but you will not ?nd me,
and where I am you cannot come.” (John 7:33,
34) The Jews do not understand, so they say
among themselves: “Where does this man intend to go, so that we will not ?nd him? He
does not intend to go to the Jews dispersed
among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, does
he? What does he mean when he says, ‘You will
look for me, but you will not ?nd me, and where
I am you cannot come’?” (John 7:35, 36) Jesus,
however, is speaking of his death and resurrection to heaven, and his enemies cannot follow
him there.
The seventh day of the festival arrives. Each
morning of the festival, a priest has poured out
water taken from the Pool of Siloam, so that it
?owed to the base of the temple’s altar. Likely reminding the people of this practice, Jesus
cries out: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to
me and drink. Whoever puts faith in me, just
as the scripture has said: ‘From deep within
him streams of living water will ?ow.’ ”—John 7:
37, 38.
Jesus is referring to what will happen when
his disciples are anointed with holy spirit and
called to be in line for heavenly life. This anointing occurs after Jesus’ death. Beginning on the
day of Pentecost the following year, streams of
160

?

life-giving water begin to ?ow as spirit-anointed
disciples share the truth with people.
In response to Jesus’ teaching, some say:
“This really is the Prophet,” evidently referring to the foretold prophet greater than Moses. Others say: “This is the Christ.” But some
argue: “The Christ is not coming out of Galilee, is he? Does the scripture not say that the
Christ is coming from the o?spring of David and
from Bethlehem, the village where David was?”
—John 7:40-42.
So the crowd is divided. Though some want
Jesus arrested, no one lays a hand on him.
When the o?cers return to the religious leaders without Jesus, the chief priests and Pharisees ask: “Why did you not bring him in?” The
o?cers reply: “Never has any man spoken like
this.” The religious leaders angrily resort to ridicule and name-calling: “You have not been misled also, have you? Not one of the rulers or of
the Pharisees has put faith in him, has he? But
this crowd who do not know the Law are accursed people.”—John 7:45-49.
At this, Nicodemus, a Pharisee and a member
of the Sanhedrin, dares to speak in Jesus’ behalf. Some two and a half years earlier, Nicodemus came to Jesus at night and expressed faith
in him. Now Nicodemus says: “Our Law does
not judge a man unless it ?rst hears from him
and learns what he is doing, does it?” What is
their defensive reply? “You are not also out of

? OFFICERS SENT TO ARREST JESUS
NICODEMUS SPEAKS IN JESUS’ BEHALF

67

Galilee, are you? Search and see that no prophet is to be raised up out of Galilee.”—John 7:
51, 52.
The Scriptures do not directly say that a
prophet would come out of Galilee. Yet God’s
Word did point to the Christ as coming from
there; it prophesied that “a great light” would
be seen in “Galilee of the nations.” (Isaiah 9:
1, 2; Matthew 4:13-17) Furthermore, as foretold, Jesus was born in Bethlehem, and he is
an o?spring of David. Although the Pharisees
may be aware of this, they are likely responsible for spreading many of the misconceptions
that people have about Jesus.

 How may Jesus be calling attention to something that occurs each morning during the festival?
 Why do the o?cers not arrest Jesus, and how do the religious leaders react?
 What indicates that the Christ would come out of Galilee?
161

“THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD”—THE SON OF GOD
JOHN 8:12-36

On the last day of the Festival of Tabernacles,
the seventh day, Jesus is teaching in the part
of the temple called “the treasury.” (John 8:
20; Luke 21:1) This apparently is in the Court
of Women, where people deposit their contributions.
At night during the festival, this area of
the temple is specially illuminated. Four giant
lampstands are there, each with four large basins ?lled with oil. The light from these lamps is
strong enough to illuminate the surroundings
to a great distance. What Jesus now says may
remind his listeners of this display: “I am the
light of the world. Whoever follows me will by no
means walk in darkness, but will possess the
light of life.”—John 8:12.
The Pharisees take exception to Jesus’ statement and say: “You bear witness about yourself; your witness is not true.” Jesus replies:
“Even if I do bear witness about myself, my witness is true, because I know where I came from
and where I am going. But you do not know
where I came from and where I am going.” He
adds: “In your own Law it is written: ‘The witness of two men is true.’ I am one who bears
witness about myself, and the Father who sent
me bears witness about me.”—John 8:13-18.
Not accepting his reasoning, the Pharisees
ask: “Where is your Father?” Jesus gives the
forthright reply: “You know neither me nor my
Father. If you did know me, you would know my
Father also.” (John 8:19) Even though the Pharisees still want Jesus arrested, no one touches
him.
Jesus repeats a statement he has already
made: “I am going away, and you will look for
me, and yet you will die in your sin. Where I am
going, you cannot come.” The Jews, completely
162

?

misunderstanding Jesus’ words, begin to wonder: “He will not kill himself, will he? Because he
says, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come.’ ”
They do not understand what Jesus means, because they are unaware of his origin. He explains: “You are from the realms below; I am
from the realms above. You are from this world;
I am not from this world.”—John 8:21-23.
Jesus is referring to his prehuman existence
in heaven and to his being the promised Messiah, or Christ, whom these religious leaders
should be expecting. Nevertheless, they ask
with great contempt: “Who are you?”—John
8:25.
In the face of their rejection and opposition,
Jesus answers: “Why am I even speaking to you
at all?” Still, he directs attention to his Father
and explains why the Jews should listen to the
Son: “The One who sent me is true, and the very
things I heard from him I am speaking in the
world.”—John 8:25, 26.
Then Jesus expresses con?dence in his Father, which these Jews lack: “After you have lifted up the Son of man, then you will know that I
am he and that I do nothing of my own initiative; but just as the Father taught me, I speak
these things. And the One who sent me is with
me; he did not abandon me to myself, because

JESUS EXPLAINS WHO THE SON IS
? HOW ARE THE JEWS SLAVES?

68

I always do the things pleasing to him.”—John
8:28, 29.
Some Jews, though, do put faith in Jesus,
and he says to them: “If you remain in my word,
you are really my disciples, and you will know
the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—John
8:31, 32.
To some, this talk of being set free seems
strange. They object: “We are Abraham’s o?spring and never have been slaves to anyone.
How is it you say, ‘You will become free’?” The
Jews know that at times they have been under
foreign domination, yet they refuse to be called
slaves. Jesus points out, however, that they still
are slaves: “Most truly I say to you, every doer
of sin is a slave of sin.”—John 8:33, 34.
Refusing to admit their slavery to sin puts the
Jews in a dangerous position. “The slave does
not remain in the household forever,” Jesus explains. “The son remains forever.” (John 8:35)
A slave has no rights to an inheritance, and he
may be dismissed at any time. Only the son actually born or adopted into the household remains “forever,” that is, as long as he lives.
Thus, the truth about the Son is the truth that
sets people free from death-dealing sin forever.
“If the Son sets you free, you will be truly free,”
Jesus declares.—John 8:36.

 What occurs at night during the festival, and how does this relate to Jesus’ teaching?
 Jesus says what about his origin, and what does this reveal about his identity?
 In what way are the Jews slaves, but what truth will set them free?
163

THEIR FATHER—ABRAHAM OR THE DEVIL?
JOHN 8:37-59

Still in Jerusalem for the Festival of Tabernacles (or, Booths), Jesus goes on teaching vital
truths. Some Jews present had just said to him:
“We are Abraham’s o?spring and never have
been slaves.” Jesus responds: “I know that you
are Abraham’s o?spring. But you are seeking to
kill me, because my word makes no progress
among you. I speak the things I have seen while
with my Father, but you do the things you have
heard from your father.”—John 8:33, 37, 38.
Jesus’ point is simple: His Father is di?erent from theirs. Unaware of what Jesus means,
the Jews repeat their claim: “Our father is Abraham.” (John 8:39; Isaiah 41:8) They are literally his descendants. So they feel that they are of
the same faith as God’s friend Abraham.
However, Jesus gives a shocking reply: “If you
were Abraham’s children, you would be doing
the works of Abraham.” Indeed, a real son imitates his father. “But now you are seeking to
kill me,” Jesus continues, “a man who has told
you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham
did not do this.” Then Jesus makes the puzzling
statement: “You are doing the works of your father.”—John 8:39-41.
The Jews still do not grasp to whom Jesus
is referring. They claim that they are legitimate
sons, saying: “We were not born from immorality; we have one Father, God.” Is God really their
Father, though? “If God were your Father,” Jesus
says, “you would love me, for I came from God
and I am here. I have not come of my own initiative, but that One sent me.” Jesus asks a question and answers it himself: “Why do you not
understand what I am saying? Because you cannot listen to my word.”—John 8:41-43.
Jesus has tried to show what the consequences of rejecting him are. But now he point164

edly says: “You are from your father the Devil,
and you wish to do the desires of your father.”
What is their father like? Jesus identi?es him
clearly: “That one was a murderer when he began, and he did not stand fast in the truth.” Jesus adds: “The one who is from God listens to
the sayings of God. This is why you do not listen, because you are not from God.”—John 8:
44, 47.
That condemnation angers the Jews, who answer: “Are we not right in saying, ‘You are a Samaritan and have a demon’?” By calling Jesus
“a Samaritan,” they are expressing contempt for
him. But Jesus ignores their slur, responding: “I
do not have a demon, but I honor my Father,
and you dishonor me.” That this is a serious
matter can be seen by Jesus’ startling promise:
“If anyone observes my word, he will never see
death at all.” He does not mean that the apostles and others who follow him will literally never die. Rather, they will never see eternal destruction, “the second death,” with no hope of a
resurrection.—John 8:48-51; Revelation 21:8.
But the Jews take Jesus’ words literally, saying: “Now we do know that you have a demon.
Abraham died, also the prophets, but you say,
‘If anyone observes my word, he will never taste
death at all.’ You are not greater than our father Abraham, who died, are you? . . . Who do
you claim to be?”—John 8:52, 53.
It is obvious that Jesus is making the point
that he is the Messiah. But rather than directly answer their question about his identity, he
says: “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It
is my Father who glori?es me, the one who you
say is your God. Yet you have not known him,
but I know him. And if I said I do not know him,
I would be like you, a liar.”—John 8:54, 55.

?

Jesus now refers back to the example of their
faithful forefather: “Abraham your father rejoiced greatly at the prospect of seeing my day,
and he saw it and rejoiced.” Yes, believing God’s
promise, Abraham looked forward to the arrival of the Messiah. “You are not yet 50 years old,
and still you have seen Abraham?” the Jews respond in disbelief. Jesus answers: “Most truly

THE JEWS CLAIM ABRAHAM AS FATHER
? BEFORE ABRAHAM, JESUS HAS BEEN

69

I say to you, before Abraham came into existence, I have been.” He is referring to his prehuman existence as a mighty spirit in heaven.
—John 8:56-58.
The Jews, enraged by Jesus’ claim to have
lived before Abraham, get ready to stone him.
But Jesus leaves unharmed.

 How does Jesus show that his Father is di?erent from the father of his enemies?
 Why is it un?tting for the Jews to insist that Abraham is their father?
 In what way will Jesus’ followers “never see death at all”?
165

JESUS HEALS A MAN BORN BLIND
JOHN 9:1-18

Jesus is still in Jerusalem on the Sabbath. As
he and his disciples are walking in the city, they
see a beggar who has been blind from birth. The
disciples ask Jesus: “Rabbi, who sinned, this
man or his parents, so that he was born blind?”
—John 9:2.
The disciples know that the man has no invisible soul that existed before he was born,
yet they may wonder whether a person might
sin while in his mother’s womb. Jesus answers:
“Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it
was so that the works of God might be made
manifest in his case.” (John 9:3) So neither this
man nor his parents were guilty of a speci?c error or sin that caused his blindness. Rather, as a
result of Adam’s sin, all humans are born imperfect and are subject to defects, such as blindness. But the man’s blindness provides an opportunity for Jesus to make manifest the works
of God, as he has done at other times in healing people of their sicknesses.
Jesus stresses that it is urgent to do these
works. “We must do the works of the One who
sent me while it is day,” he says. “The night is
coming when no man can work. As long as I
am in the world, I am the world’s light.” (John
9:4, 5) Yes, soon Jesus’ death will plunge him
into the darkness of the grave where he can do
nothing. In the meantime, he is a source of enlightenment to the world.
But will Jesus heal the man, and if so, how?
Jesus spits on the ground and with the saliva
makes a paste. He puts some of it on the blind
man’s eyes and says: “Go wash in the pool of
Siloam.” (John 9:7) The man obeys. When he
does, he can see! Think of his joy at seeing for
the ?rst time in his life!
Neighbors and others who knew him to be
166

blind are amazed. “This is the man who used
to sit and beg, is it not?” they ask. “This is
he,” some answer. But others cannot believe it
and say: “No, but he looks like him.” The man
himself responds: “I am he.”—John 9:8, 9.
Hence, they ask him: “How, then, were your
eyes opened?” He replies: “The man called Jesus made a paste and smeared it on my eyes
and said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I
went and washed and gained sight.” They then
ask: “Where is that man?” The beggar answers:
“I do not know.”—John 9:10-12.
The people lead the man to the Pharisees,
who also want to know how he gained sight. He
tells them: “He put a paste on my eyes, and I
washed, and I can see.” It would seem natural
that the Pharisees would want to rejoice with
the healed beggar. Instead, some of them de-

?

nounce Jesus. “This is not a man from God,”
they claim, “for he does not observe the Sabbath.” Yet others say: “How can a man who is a
sinner perform signs of that sort?” (John 9:15,
16) So they are divided.
Faced with these con?icting views, they turn
to the man who now can see and ask: “What do
you say about him, since it was your eyes that

A BEGGAR BLIND FROM BIRTH IS HEALED

70

he opened?” He has no doubts about Jesus and
responds: “He is a prophet.”—John 9:17.
The Jews refuse to believe this. They may
think that there is some scheme between Jesus
and this man to fool the people. They conclude
that one way to settle the matter is to question
the beggar’s parents about whether he really
was blind.

 What is the cause of the man’s blindness, and what is not?
 How do those who know the blind man react to his being healed?
 How are the Pharisees divided over the man’s being healed?
167

PHARISEES CONFRONT THE MAN WHO WAS BLIND
JOHN 9:19- 41

The Pharisees cannot accept that Jesus gave
sight to the man who was born blind, so they
call in his parents. The parents know that they
face the possibility of being “expelled from the
synagogue.” (John 9:22) Such cutting o? of fellowship from other Jews would have severe social and economic consequences for the family.
The Pharisees ask two questions: “Is this your
son who you say was born blind? How, then,
does he now see?” The parents reply: “We know
that this is our son and that he was born blind.
But how it is that he now sees, we do not know;
or who opened his eyes, we do not know.” Even
if their son had told them what had happened,
the parents are cautious as to how they respond
and say: “Ask him. He is of age. He must speak
for himself.”—John 9:19-21.
Hence, the Pharisees call the man back and
intimidate him by claiming that they have evidence against Jesus. “Give glory to God,” they
demand. “We know that this man is a sinner.”
De?ecting their charge, the man who was blind
says: “Whether he is a sinner, I do not know.”
Yet he states: “One thing I do know, that I was
blind, but now I can see.”—John 9:24, 25.
Unwilling to leave the matter at that, the
Pharisees continue: “What did he do to you?
How did he open your eyes?” The man shows
some courage in replying: “I told you already,
and yet you did not listen. Why do you want to
hear it again? You do not want to become his
disciples also, do you?” Enraged, the Pharisees
charge: “You are a disciple of that man, but we
are disciples of Moses. We know that God has
spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not
know where he is from.”—John 9:26-29.
Expressing wonderment, the beggar comments: “This is certainly amazing, that you do
168

not know where he is from, and yet he opened
my eyes.” The man then makes a logical argument as to whom God hears and approves: “We
know that God does not listen to sinners, but if
anyone is God-fearing and does his will, he listens to this one. From of old it has never been
heard that anyone opened the eyes of one born
blind.” This leads to the conclusion: “If this man
were not from God, he could do nothing at all.”
—John 9:30-33.
Unable to refute the beggar’s reasoning, the
Pharisees revile him, saying: “You were altogether born in sin, and yet are you teaching
us?” They throw him out.—John 9:34.
When Jesus hears what happened, he ?nds
the man and asks: “Are you putting faith in the
Son of man?” The healed man responds: “And
who is he, sir, so that I may put faith in him?”
Leaving no doubt, Jesus says: “You have seen
him, and in fact, he is the one speaking with
you.”—John 9:35-37.
The man replies: “I do put faith in him, Lord.”
Showing faith and respect, the man bows down
before Jesus, who makes a profound statement: “For this judgment I came into this world,
that those not seeing might see and those seeing might become blind.”—John 9:38, 39.
The Pharisees, who happen to be there, know
that they are not sightless. But what of their
presumed role as spiritual guides? They ask
defensively: “We are not blind also, are we?”
Jesus says: “If you were blind, you would have
no sin. But now you say, ‘We see.’ Your sin
remains.” (John 9:40, 41) Had they not been
teachers in Israel, rejecting Jesus as the Messiah might be understandable. But with their
knowledge of the Law, their rejection of him is
a serious sin.

?

PHARISEES CONFRONT THE ONCE BLIND MAN
? RELIGIOUS LEADERS ARE “BLIND”

71

 Why are the parents of the once blind beggar afraid when they are called before the Pharisees,
and how do they answer?
 The Pharisees become enraged at what logical argument?
 Why do the Pharisees have no excuse for opposing Jesus?
169

JESUS SENDS 70 DISCIPLES TO PREACH
LUKE 10:1-24

It is now late in the year 32 C.E., about three
years since Jesus’ baptism. He and his disciples
recently were at the Festival of Tabernacles in
Jerusalem. They likely are still nearby. (Luke 10:
38; John 11:1) In fact, Jesus spends most of the
remaining six months of his ministry in Judea or
across the Jordan River in the district of Perea.
Preaching is needed in these areas too.
Earlier, after the Passover of 30 C.E., Jesus
spent some months preaching in Judea and
traveling through Samaria. Then about the time
of the Passover of 31 C.E., Jews in Jerusalem
tried to kill him. For the next year and a half, Jesus taught mainly up north, in Galilee. During
that time, many became his followers. In Galilee, Jesus trained his apostles and then sent
them out with the instruction: “Preach, saying:
‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’ ”
(Matthew 10:5-7) Now he organizes a witnessing campaign in Judea.
To start this campaign, Jesus chooses 70
disciples and sends them out by twos. Thus,
there are 35 teams of Kingdom preachers in the
territory, where “the harvest is great, but the
workers are few.” (Luke 10:2) They are to go in
advance into places where Jesus might follow.
The 70 are to cure the sick and spread the same
message that Jesus has been proclaiming.
These disciples are not to focus on teaching in synagogues. Jesus tells them to go to
people’s homes. “Wherever you enter into a
house,” he instructs, “say ?rst: ‘May this house
have peace.’ And if a friend of peace is there,
your peace will rest upon him.” What is to
be their message? Jesus says: “Tell them: ‘The
Kingdom of God has come near to you.’ ”—Luke
10:5-9.
The instructions Jesus gives the 70 are sim170

ilar to those he gave when sending out the
12 apostles about a year earlier. He warns them
that not all will receive them well. Their e?orts,
though, will prepare receptive ones so that
when Jesus arrives shortly afterward, many will
be eager to meet the Master and learn from him.
Before long, the 35 pairs of Kingdom preachers return to Jesus. They tell him joyfully: “Lord,
even the demons are made subject to us by the
use of your name.” This ?ne report surely thrills
Jesus, for he responds: “I see Satan already fallen like lightning from heaven. Look! I have given you the authority to trample underfoot serpents and scorpions.”—Luke 10:17-19.
Jesus thus assures his followers that they will
be able to prevail over injurious things, symbolically trampling on serpents and scorpions.

?

Moreover, they can be certain that in the future
Satan will fall from heaven. Jesus also helps the
70 to see what is really important in the long
run. He says: “Do not rejoice because the spirits are made subject to you, but rejoice because
your names have been written in the heavens.”
—Luke 10:20.
Jesus is overjoyed and publicly praises his

JESUS CHOOSES 70 DISCIPLES AND
SENDS THEM OUT TO PREACH

72

Father for using these humble servants of his
in such a powerful way. Turning to his disciples,
he tells them: “Happy are the eyes that see the
things you are seeing. For I say to you, many
prophets and kings desired to see the things
you are observing but did not see them, and to
hear the things you are hearing but did not hear
them.”—Luke 10:23, 24.

 Where does Jesus preach during his ?nal six months, and why does he concentrate his e?orts there?
 How were the 70 disciples to ?nd people?
 Though the 70 disciples accomplish much, what does Jesus say is of greater importance?

A SAMARITAN PROVES TO BE A REAL NEIGHBOR
LUKE 10:25-37

While Jesus is still near Jerusalem, various
Jews approach him. Some want to learn from
him and others want to test him. One of them,
an expert on the Law, presents the question:
“Teacher, what do I need to do to inherit everlasting life?”—Luke 10:25.
Jesus detects that the man is not simply asking for information. He may be trying to get Jesus to reply in a way that will o?end the Jews.
Jesus realizes that this man already has a definite viewpoint. So he wisely responds in a way
that gets the man to reveal what he is thinking.
Jesus asks: “What is written in the Law? How
do you read?” This man has studied God’s Law,
so he bases his response on it. He quotes from
Deuteronomy 6:5 and Leviticus 19:18, saying:
“ ‘You must love Jehovah your God with your
whole heart and with your whole soul and with
your whole strength and with your whole mind’
and ‘your neighbor as yourself.’ ” (Luke 10:26,
27) Is that the answer?
Jesus tells the man: “You answered correctly; keep doing this and you will get life.” But
does that end the discussion? The man does
not want just a factual answer; he is seeking “to
prove himself righteous,” to have con?rmation
that his views are correct and that he is thus
justi?ed in how he treats others. So he asks:
“Who really is my neighbor?” (Luke 10:28, 29)
That seemingly simple question has deep implications. How so?
The Jews believe that the term “neighbor” applies only to those who keep the Jewish traditions, and it might seem that Leviticus 19:18
supports that. In fact, a Jew may claim that it
is even “unlawful” to have fellowship with a nonJew. (Acts 10:28) Thus this man and possibly
some of Jesus’ own disciples view themselves
172

as righteous if they treat fellow Jews kindly. But
they may treat a non-Jew unkindly; he is not
really a “neighbor.”
How can Jesus correct this view without offending this man and other Jews? He does so
by telling a story: “A man was going down from
Jerusalem to Jericho and fell victim to robbers,
who stripped him, beat him, and went o?, leaving him half-dead.” Jesus continues: “By coincidence a priest was going down on that road, but
when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side. Likewise, a Levite, when he came to
the place and saw him, passed by on the opposite side. But a certain Samaritan traveling the
road came upon him, and at seeing him, he was
moved with pity.”—Luke 10:30-33.
The man to whom Jesus tells this story certainly knows that many priests and Levite temple assistants live in Jericho. To return from
the temple, they must travel down a road some
14 miles. That route can be dangerous, with robbers lurking along it. If a priest and a Levite ?nd
a fellow Jew in distress, should they not help
him? In his story, Jesus relates that they did not.
The one who did was a Samaritan, a man from
a people whom the Jews despise.—John 8:48.
How did the Samaritan help the injured Jew?
Jesus goes on: “He approached him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on
them. Then he mounted him on his own animal
and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
The next day he took out two denarii, gave them
to the innkeeper, and said: ‘Take care of him,
and whatever you spend besides this, I will repay you when I return.’ ”—Luke 10:34, 35.
After telling the story, the Master Teacher, Jesus, asks the man this thought-provoking question: “Who of these three seems to you to have

?

made himself neighbor to the man who fell victim to the robbers?” Perhaps the man feels uncomfortable in answering “the Samaritan,” so
he replies: “The one who acted mercifully toward him.” Jesus then makes the lesson of his
story unmistakably clear, urging: “Go and do
the same yourself.”—Luke 10:36, 37.
What an e?ective method of teaching! Had
Jesus simply told the man that non-Jews also

HOW TO INHERIT EVERLASTING LIFE
? A NEIGHBORLY SAMARITAN

73

are his neighbors, would the man and the other
Jews listening have accepted that? Likely not.
However, by relating a rather simple story, using details that the listeners can identify with,
the answer to the question, “Who really is my
neighbor?” becomes obvious. The person who
proves to be the real neighbor is the one who
exercises the love and kindness that the Scriptures command us to show.

 Why might a certain man question Jesus about how to gain everlasting life?
 Who do the Jews believe are their neighbors, and why?
 How does Jesus make clear the correct view of who is our neighbor?
173

LESSONS ABOUT HOSPITALITY AND PRAYER
LUKE 10:38–11:13

On the eastern slope of the Mount of Olives,
about two miles from Jerusalem, lies the village of Bethany. (John 11:18) Jesus goes there
and enters the house of two sisters, Martha and
Mary. They and their brother, Lazarus, are Jesus’ friends, and they warmly welcome him.
It is an honor to have the Messiah as a visitor. Martha is eager to provide well for Jesus, so
she sets to work preparing an elaborate meal.
While Martha works, her sister, Mary, sits at Jesus’ feet and listens to him. In time, Martha says
to Jesus: “Lord, does it not matter to you that
my sister has left me alone to attend to things?
Tell her to come and help me.”—Luke 10:40.
Rather than criticizing Mary, Jesus counsels
Martha for being overly concerned with material provisions: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious
and disturbed about many things. A few things,
though, are needed, or just one. For her part,
Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be
taken away from her.” (Luke 10:41, 42) Yes, Jesus points out that it is not necessary to spend
a lot of time preparing many dishes. Just a simple meal will su?ce.
Martha’s intentions are good. She wants to
be hospitable. But her anxious attention to the
meal means that she is missing out on valuable
instruction from God’s own Son! Jesus emphasizes that Mary made a wise choice, one that will
be of lasting bene?t to her as well as a lesson
for all of us to remember.
On another occasion, Jesus provides a different but equally important lesson. A disciple
asks him: “Lord, teach us how to pray, just as
John also taught his disciples.” (Luke 11:1) Jesus had already done so about a year and a half
earlier in his Sermon on the Mount. (Matthew 6:
9-13) However, this disciple may not have been
174

present then, so Jesus repeats the key points.
Then he gives an illustration to emphasize the
need to be persistent in prayer.
“Suppose one of you has a friend and you go
to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend
me three loaves, because one of my friends has
just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to o?er him.’ But that one replies from inside: ‘Stop bothering me. The door is already
locked, and my young children are with me in
bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’ I
tell you, even if he will not get up and give him
anything because of being his friend, certainly
because of his bold persistence he will get up
and give him whatever he needs.”—Luke 11:5-8.
Jesus is not implying that Jehovah is unwilling to respond to petitions, as was the friend.
Rather, he is showing that if an unwilling friend
will respond to persistent requests, certainly
our loving heavenly Father will respond to the
sincere petitions of his faithful servants! Jesus
continues: “I say to you, keep on asking, and it
will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will
?nd; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to
you. For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking ?nds, and to everyone knocking, it
will be opened.”—Luke 11:9, 10.
Jesus then underscores his point by making a comparison to human fathers: “Which father among you, if his son asks for a ?sh, will
hand him a serpent instead of a ?sh? Or if he
also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?
Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how
much more so will the Father in heaven give
holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:11-13)
What a ?ne assurance that our Father is willing
to hear us and respond to our needs!

?
?

JESUS VISITS MARTHA AND MARY
PERSISTENCE IN PRAYER IS VITAL

74

 How do Martha and Mary di?er in their focus, and what lesson can we learn from this?
 Why does Jesus repeat his instructions on prayer?
 How does Jesus illustrate the need to persist in prayer?
175

JESUS REVEALS THE SOURCE OF HAPPINESS
LUKE 11:14-36

Jesus has just repeated his instructions about
prayer, but that is not the only subject that
comes up more than once during his ministry.
When he was performing miracles in Galilee, Jesus faced the false charge that he did so by
means of power from the ruler of the demons.
Now in Judea this charge arises again.
When Jesus casts out of a man a demon that
prevents him from speaking, the crowds are
amazed. Not his critics, though. They bring up
the same false accusation: “He expels the demons by means of Beelzebub, the ruler of the
demons.” (Luke 11:15) Others, seeking more evidence as to Jesus’ identity, ask him for a sign
from heaven.
Realizing that they are trying to test him, Jesus answers them as he did similar critics encountered in Galilee. He says that every kingdom divided against itself will fall, reasoning:
“If Satan is also divided against himself, how
will his kingdom stand?” Then Jesus tells them
directly: “If it is by means of God’s ?nger that I
expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.”—Luke 11:18-20.
Jesus’ mention of “God’s ?nger” should call
to his listeners’ minds what happened earlier in Israel’s history. Those in Pharaoh’s court
who saw Moses perform a miracle exclaimed: “It
is the ?nger of God!” It was also “God’s ?nger” that wrote the Ten Commandments on two
stone tablets. (Exodus 8:19; 31:18) Similarly,
“God’s ?nger”—his holy spirit, or active force—
is what is now enabling Jesus to expel demons
and cure sick people. Hence, the Kingdom of
God has indeed overtaken these opposers, because the designated King of the Kingdom, Jesus, is right there performing these works.
Jesus’ ability to expel demons is evidence of
176

his power over Satan, just as when a stronger
man approaches and overpowers a well-armed
man guarding a palace. Jesus also repeats his
illustration about an unclean spirit that leaves
a man. If the man does not ?ll the void with
good things, that spirit will return with seven
others, making the man’s ?nal condition worse
than at the ?rst. (Matthew 12:22, 25-29, 4345) So it is proving to be with the nation of
Israel.
A woman listening to Jesus is moved to exclaim: “Happy is the womb that carried you
and the breasts that nursed you!” Jewish women hoped to be the mother of a prophet, particularly of the Messiah. So this woman might
think that Mary can be especially happy as the
mother of such a teacher. Yet Jesus corrects the
woman as to the true source of happiness: “No,
rather, happy are those hearing the word of God
and keeping it!” (Luke 11:27, 28) Jesus has never suggested that Mary should be given special honor. Rather, true happiness for any man
or woman is found in being a faithful servant
of God, not in any physical ties or accomplishments.
As Jesus did in Galilee, he rebukes the people for demanding a sign from heaven. He says
that no sign will be given them except “the sign
of Jonah.” Jonah served as a sign both by his
three days in the ?sh and by his bold preaching, which moved the Ninevites to repent. Jesus
says: “But look! something more than Jonah is
here.” (Luke 11:29-32) Jesus also is more than
Solomon, whose wisdom the queen of Sheba
came to hear.
“After lighting a lamp,” Jesus adds, “a person puts it, not in a hidden place nor under a
basket, but on the lampstand.” (Luke 11:33) He

?

may mean that teaching and performing miracles before these people is like hiding the light
of a lamp. Because their eyes are not focused,
they miss the purpose of his works.
Jesus has just expelled a demon and has
caused a man who was speechless to speak.
That should motivate people to glorify God and

EXPELLING DEMONS BY “GOD’S FINGER”
? SOURCE OF TRUE HAPPINESS

75

tell others what Jehovah is accomplishing. So
Jesus has words of warning for his critics: “Be
alert, therefore, that the light that is in you
is not darkness. Therefore, if your whole body
is bright with no part of it dark, it will all be
as bright as when a lamp gives you light by its
rays.”—Luke 11:35, 36.

 How do some in Judea respond to Jesus’ healing a man?
 What is “God’s ?nger,” and how has God’s Kingdom overtaken Jesus’ listeners?
 How can people ?nd true happiness?
177

DINING WITH A PHARISEE
LUKE 11:37-54

While in Judea, Jesus accepts a meal invitation
from a Pharisee. It is likely during the day, rather than an evening meal. (Luke 11:37, 38; compare Luke 14:12.) Before eating, the Pharisees
carry out ritual washing of their hands up to
the elbow. But Jesus does not. (Matthew 15:
1, 2) It would not violate God’s Law to wash
to that extent, yet it is not something God requires.
The Pharisee is surprised that Jesus does
not follow that tradition. Jesus detects this and
says: “Now you Pharisees, you cleanse the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full
of greediness and wickedness. Unreasonable
ones! The one who made the outside made also
the inside, did he not?”—Luke 11:39, 40.
Having clean hands before eating is not the
issue, but religious hypocrisy is. The Pharisees
and others who ritualistically wash their hands
fail to cleanse their hearts from wickedness. So
Jesus counsels them: “Give as gifts of mercy
the things that are from within, and look! everything about you will be clean.” (Luke 11:41) How
true! Giving should spring from a loving heart,
not from a desire to impress others by a pretense of righteousness.
It is not that these men do not give. Jesus
points out: “You give the tenth of the mint and
of the rue and of every other garden herb, but
you disregard the justice and the love of God!
These things you were under obligation to do,
but not to disregard those other things.” (Luke
11:42) God’s Law called for the paying of tithes
(a tenth part) of crops. (Deuteronomy 14:22)
That included the mint and the rue, herbs or
plants used to ?avor food. The Pharisees scrupulously paid a tenth of these herbs, but what
of the more important requirements of the Law,
178

such as to exercise justice and to be modest before God?—Micah 6:8.
Jesus goes on to say: “Woe to you Pharisees,
because you love the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces!
Woe to you, because you are as those graves
that are not clearly visible, that men walk on
and do not know it!” (Luke 11:43, 44) Yes, people could stumble on such graves and become
ceremonially unclean. Jesus uses that fact to
underscore that the uncleanness of the Pharisees is not apparent.—Matthew 23:27.
One man who is well-versed in God’s Law
complains: “Teacher, in saying these things,
you insult us also.” Yet such men need to realize that they are failing to help the people.
Jesus says: “Woe also to you who are versed
in the Law, because you load men down with
loads hard to carry, but you yourselves do not
touch the loads with one of your ?ngers! Woe to
you, because you build the tombs of the prophets, but your forefathers killed them!”—Luke 11:
45-47.
The loads that Jesus refers to are the oral traditions and the Pharisees’ interpretation of the
Law. These men are not making life easier for
the people. Rather, they insist that all must keep
what become heavy burdens. Their ancestors
killed God’s prophets, from Abel onward. Now
they, who make it seem as if they are honoring the prophets by building tombs for them,
are imitating the attitude and actions of their
forefathers. They are even seeking to kill God’s
foremost Prophet. Jesus says that God will hold
an accounting with this generation. And that
became a reality about 38 years later, in 70 C.E.
Jesus continues: “Woe to you who are
versed in the Law, because you took away the

? JESUS CONDEMNS
THE HYPOCRITICAL PHARISEES

key of knowledge. You yourselves did not go
in, and you hinder those going in!” (Luke 11:
52) These men, who should be unlocking the
meaning of God’s Word, are instead taking
away the opportunity for people to know and
understand it.

76

How do the Pharisees and scribes react? As
Jesus departs, they begin to oppose him angrily and to assail him with questions. They are not
asking out of a desire to learn. Instead, they
want to trick Jesus into saying something for
which they can have him arrested.

 Why does Jesus condemn the Pharisees and scribes?
 The people are pressured to carry what loads?
 What lies ahead for those who oppose Jesus and seek to kill him?
179

JESUS GIVES COUNSEL ABOUT RICHES
LUKE 12:1-34

As Jesus dines at the Pharisee’s house, thousands gather outside awaiting him. He has had
similar experiences with the crowds in Galilee. (Mark 1:33; 2:2; 3:9) Here in Judea, many
want to see and hear him, showing an attitude
quite di?erent from that of the Pharisees at
the meal.
What Jesus says ?rst has special meaning
for his disciples: “Watch out for the leaven of
the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.” Jesus has
given this warning before, but what he saw
at the meal shows how urgent this counsel is.
(Luke 12:1; Mark 8:15) The Pharisees may try
to conceal their wickedness with a show of piety, but they are a danger that needs to be exposed. Jesus explains: “There is nothing carefully concealed that will not be revealed, and
nothing secret that will not become known.”
—Luke 12:2.
Perhaps many of the people crowding around
Jesus are Judeans who had not heard him teach
in Galilee. Thus, he repeats key thoughts that
he expressed earlier. He urges all who are listening: “Do not fear those who kill the body
and after this are not able to do anything
more.” (Luke 12:4) As he has done before, he
stresses the need for his followers to trust that
God will care for them. They also need to acknowledge the Son of man and realize that God
can help them.—Matthew 10:19, 20, 26-33; 12:
31, 32.
Then a man in the crowd brings up his immediate concern: “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.” (Luke 12:13) The
Law says that the ?rstborn son receives two
parts of the inheritance, so there should be no
dispute. (Deuteronomy 21:17) It seems, though,
that this man wants more than his legal share.
180

Jesus wisely refuses to take sides. “Man, who
appointed me judge or arbitrator between you
two?” he asks.—Luke 12:14.
Jesus then gives this admonition to all: “Keep
your eyes open and guard against every sort
of greed, because even when a person has an
abundance, his life does not result from the
things he possesses.” (Luke 12:15) No matter
how much wealth a man may have, will he not
at some point die and leave everything behind?
Jesus emphasizes that point with a memorable
illustration that also shows the value of having
a good name with God:
“The land of a rich man produced well. So he
began reasoning within himself, ‘What should
I do now that I have nowhere to gather my
crops?’ Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear
down my storehouses and build bigger ones,
and there I will gather all my grain and all my
goods, and I will say to myself: “You have many
good things stored up for many years; take it
easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.” ’ But God said
to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are
demanding your life from you. Who, then, is to
have the things you stored up?’ So it goes with
the man who stores up treasure for himself but
is not rich toward God.”—Luke 12:16-21.
Both Jesus’ disciples and the others hearing
him could become ensnared by seeking or piling up wealth. Or the cares of life could distract
them from serving Jehovah. So Jesus repeats
the ?ne counsel he gave about a year and a half
earlier in the Sermon on the Mount:
“Stop being anxious about your lives as to
what you will eat or about your bodies as to
what you will wear. . . . Consider the ravens:
They neither sow seed nor reap; they have neither barn nor storehouse; yet God feeds them.

? ILLUSTRATION OF THE RICH MAN
JESUS SPEAKS OF RAVENS AND LILIES
A “LITTLE FLOCK” TO BE IN THE KINGDOM
?

?

77

Are you not worth much more than birds? . . .
Consider how the lilies grow: They neither toil
nor spin; but I tell you that not even Solomon in
all his glory was arrayed as one of these. . . . So
stop seeking what you will eat and what you will
drink, and stop being in anxious suspense . . .
Your Father knows you need these things. . . .
Keep seeking his Kingdom, and these things will
be added to you.”—Luke 12:22-31; Matthew 6:
25-33.
Who will be seeking God’s Kingdom? Jesus
reveals that a relatively small number, a “little ?ock,” of faithful humans will be doing so.
Later it will be revealed that their number is
just 144,000. What is in store for them? They
have Jesus’ assurance: “Your Father has approved of giving you the Kingdom.” These will
not concentrate on gaining treasures on earth,
which thieves could steal. Rather, their heart
will be on “never-failing treasure in the heavens,” where they will reign with Christ.—Luke
12:32-34.

 How does Jesus respond to a question about inheritance?
 Why is the illustration that Jesus gives worth our serious attention?
 What does Jesus reveal about those who will be in the Kingdom with him?
181

KEEP READY, FAITHFUL STEWARD!
LUKE 12:35-59

Jesus has explained that only a “little ?ock” will
receive a place in the heavenly Kingdom. (Luke
12:32) But receiving that marvelous reward is
not something to be treated lightly. In fact, he
goes on to stress how important it will be for a
person to have the right attitude if he is to be
part of the Kingdom.
Accordingly, Jesus admonishes his disciples
to keep ready for his return. He says: “Be
dressed and ready and have your lamps burning, and you should be like men waiting for
their master to return from the marriage, so
when he comes and knocks, they may at once
open to him. Happy are those slaves whom the
master on coming ?nds watching!”—Luke 12:
35-37.
The disciples can easily grasp the attitude
that Jesus is illustrating. The servants he mentions are ready, awaiting their master’s return.
Jesus explains: “If [the master] comes in the
second watch [from about nine in the evening
to midnight], even if in the third [from midnight
to about three in the morning], and ?nds them
ready, happy are they!”—Luke 12:38.
This is much more than counsel about being diligent house servants, or workers. That
is clear from the way Jesus, the Son of man,
brings himself into the illustration. He tells his
disciples: “You also, keep ready, because at an
hour that you do not think likely, the Son of
man is coming.” (Luke 12:40) So at some future
point, Jesus will come. He wants his followers
—particularly those of the “little ?ock”—to be
ready.
Peter wants to understand Jesus’ meaning
clearly, so he asks: “Lord, are you telling this illustration just to us or also to everyone?” Rather than answer Peter directly, Jesus sets out a
182

related illustration: “Who really is the faithful
steward, the discreet one, whom his master will
appoint over his body of attendants to keep giving them their measure of food supplies at the
proper time? Happy is that slave if his master
on coming ?nds him doing so! I tell you truthfully, he will appoint him over all his belongings.”—Luke 12:41-44.
In the earlier illustration, “the master” obviously refers to Jesus, the Son of man. Logically, “the faithful steward” involves men who
are part of the “little ?ock” and who will be
given the Kingdom. (Luke 12:32) Here Jesus is
saying that certain members of this group will
be giving “his body of attendants” their sustenance, “their measure of food supplies at the
proper time.” So Peter and the other disciples
whom Jesus is teaching and feeding spiritually
can conclude that there will be a future period
during which the Son of man will come. And in
that period, there will be a functioning arrangement for the spiritual feeding of Jesus’ followers, the Master’s “body of attendants.”
Jesus emphasizes in another way why his disciples need to be alert and to give attention to
their attitude. That is because it is possible to
grow lax and even go to the point of opposing one’s fellows: “But if ever that slave should
say in his heart, ‘My master delays coming,’ and
starts to beat the male and female servants and
to eat and drink and get drunk, the master of
that slave will come on a day that he is not expecting him and at an hour that he does not
know, and he will punish him with the greatest
severity and assign him a part with the unfaithful ones.”—Luke 12:45, 46.
Jesus says that he has come “to start a
?re on the earth.” And he has, raising issues

?

that cause great heat of controversy and result in the consuming of false teachings and
traditions. This even separates individuals who
might be expected to be united, dividing “father against son and son against father, mother
against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and
daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”—Luke
12:49, 53.
These comments have been especially for his
disciples. Then Jesus turns to the crowds. Most

THE FAITHFUL STEWARD MUST KEEP READY
? JESUS COMES TO CREATE DIVISION

78

of the people have stubbornly refused to accept
the evidence that he is the Messiah, so he tells
them: “When you see a cloud rising in the west,
at once you say, ‘A storm is coming,’ and it happens. And when you see that a south wind is
blowing, you say, ‘There will be a heat wave,’
and it occurs. Hypocrites, you know how to examine the appearance of earth and sky, but why
do you not know how to examine this particular time?” (Luke 12:54-56) They clearly are not
ready.

 Who is “the master,” and who is “the faithful steward”?
 Why can the disciples conclude that there will be a faithful steward in the future,
and what is this steward’s role?
 Why is Jesus’ counsel to “keep ready” so important?
183

WHY DESTRUCTION IS AHEAD
LUKE 13:1-21

Jesus has tried in many ways to move the people to think about their standing with God. Another occasion arises after his discussion with
people outside the house of a Pharisee.
Some of them mention a tragic event. They
speak about “the Galileans whose blood [the
Roman Governor Pontius] Pilate had mixed
with their sacri?ces.” (Luke 13:1) What do they
mean?
Perhaps these Galileans were the ones killed
when thousands of Jews protested Pilate’s use
of money from the temple treasury to construct
an aqueduct to bring water into Jerusalem. Pilate may have acquired the money with the cooperation of the temple authorities. Those relating this tragedy may feel that the Galileans
su?ered the calamity because they were guilty
of wicked deeds. Jesus disagrees.
He asks: “Do you think that those Galileans
were worse sinners than all other Galileans because they have su?ered these things?” His answer is no. But he uses the incident to warn the
Jews: “Unless you repent, you will all likewise
be destroyed.” (Luke 13:2, 3) Jesus then refers
to another tragedy that may have occurred recently and may have been related to the construction of that aqueduct, asking:
“Those 18 on whom the tower in Siloam fell,
killing them—do you think that they had greater
guilt than all other men who live in Jerusalem?”
(Luke 13:4) The crowd may feel that those individuals died because of some personal badness. Again Jesus disagrees. He knows that
“time and unexpected events” happen and are
likely responsible for this tragedy too. (Ecclesiastes 9:11) The people, though, should take a
lesson from the event. “Unless you repent, you
will all be destroyed, as they were,” Jesus says.
184

(Luke 13:5) But why is he stressing this lesson
now?
It has to do with where he is in the course of
his ministry, and he illustrates the matter this
way: “A man had a ?g tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it but
found none. Then he said to the vinedresser,
‘Here it is three years that I have come looking
for fruit on this ?g tree, but have found none.
Cut it down! Why should it keep the ground useless?’ In reply he said to him, ‘Master, leave it
alone for one more year until I dig around it and
put on manure. If it produces fruit in the future,

well and good; but if not, then cut it down.’ ”
—Luke 13:6-9.
For more than three years, Jesus has been
trying to cultivate faith among the Jews. Yet,
relatively few have become disciples and can be
considered fruitage of his labors. Now, in the
fourth year of his ministry, he is intensifying his
e?orts. It is as if he were digging and putting
fertilizer around the Jewish ?g tree by preaching and teaching in Judea and Perea. With what
results? Only a small number of Jews respond.
As a whole, the nation refuses to repent and is
now in line for destruction.
That lack of response on the part of most
once again comes to the fore shortly after-

?

JESUS DRAWS A LESSON FROM TWO TRAGEDIES
? CRIPPLED WOMAN HEALED ON THE SABBATH

79

(Luke 13:14) That o?cer is not denying that Jesus has the power to heal; rather, he is condemning the people for coming to be healed on
the Sabbath! Jesus responds with clear logic:
“Hypocrites, does not each one of you on the
Sabbath untie his bull or his donkey from the
stall and lead it away to give it something to
drink? Should not this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham and whom Satan held bound for
18 years, be released from this bondage on the
Sabbath day?”—Luke 13:15, 16.
The opposers feel shame, but the crowds rejoice over the glorious things they are seeing
Jesus do. Then Jesus repeats here in Judea
two prophetic illustrations regarding the Kingdom, which he had related earlier from a boat
on the Sea of Galilee.—Matthew 13:31-33; Luke
13:18-21.
ward on a Sabbath. Jesus is teaching in a
synagogue. He sees a woman who, because
a demon is a?icting her, has been bent double for 18 years. Showing compassion, Jesus
tells her: “Woman, you are released from your
weakness.” (Luke 13:12) Jesus lays his hands
on her, and instantly she straightens up and
starts to glorify God.
That angers the presiding o?cer of the synagogue, who says: “There are six days on which
work ought to be done; so come and be cured
on those days, and not on the Sabbath day.”

 What two tragedies does Jesus use to provide a warning, and what is the warning?
 How does the illustration of the unfruitful ?g tree highlight the situation of the Jewish nation?
 Over what is the presiding o?cer of the synagogue critical, and how does Jesus expose
the man’s hypocrisy?
185

THE FINE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEPFOLDS
JOHN 10:1-21

As Jesus continues teaching in Judea, he now
draws on something that his listeners can easily picture—sheep and sheepfolds. But he is
speaking illustratively. The Jews may recall David’s words: “Jehovah is my Shepherd. I will lack
nothing. In grassy pastures he makes me lie
down.” (Psalm 23:1, 2) In another psalm, David
invited the nation: “Let us kneel before Jehovah
our Maker. For he is our God, and we are the
people of his pasture.” (Psalm 95:6, 7) Yes, the
Israelites under the Law were long likened to a
?ock of sheep.
These “sheep” have been in a “sheepfold” in
that they were born under the Mosaic Law covenant. The Law served as a fence, separating
them from the corrupting practices of people
not under this arrangement. Some Israelites,
however, mistreated God’s ?ock. Jesus states:
“Most truly I say to you, the one who does not
enter into the sheepfold through the door but
climbs in by another way, that one is a thief and
a plunderer. But the one who enters through the
door is the shepherd of the sheep.”—John 10:
1, 2.
The people may think of men who have
claimed to be the Messiah, or Christ. These are
like thieves and plunderers. The people should
not follow such impostors. Rather, they should
follow “the shepherd of the sheep,” about whom
Jesus says:
“The doorkeeper opens to this one, and the
sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep
by name and leads them out. When he has
brought all his own out, he goes ahead of them,
and the sheep follow him, because they know his
voice. They will by no means follow a stranger
but will ?ee from him, because they do not know
the voice of strangers.”—John 10:3-5.
186

Earlier, John the Baptist, like a doorkeeper,
identi?ed Jesus as the one whom those symbolic sheep under the Law should follow. And
some sheep, in Galilee and right here in Judea,
have recognized Jesus’ voice. To where would
he ‘lead them out’? And what would result from
following him? Some hearing this illustration
may wonder, because ‘they do not understand
what he is saying to them.’—John 10:6.
Jesus explains: “Most truly I say to you, I am
the door for the sheep. All those who have come
in place of me are thieves and plunderers; but
the sheep have not listened to them. I am the
door; whoever enters through me will be saved,
and that one will go in and out and ?nd pasturage.”—John 10:7-9.
Clearly, Jesus is introducing something new.
His listeners know that he is not the door to the
Law covenant, which has existed for centuries.
So he must be saying that the sheep he ‘leads
out’ are to enter another sheepfold. With what
result?
Further explaining his role, Jesus says: “I
have come that they may have life and have
it in abundance. I am the ?ne shepherd; the
?ne shepherd surrenders his life in behalf of the
sheep.” (John 10:10, 11) Jesus had earlier comforted his disciples by saying: “Have no fear, little ?ock, for your Father has approved of giving
you the Kingdom.” (Luke 12:32) Indeed, those
who make up the “little ?ock” are ones Jesus
will lead into a new sheepfold, so that they may
“have life and have it in abundance.” What a
blessing to be part of that ?ock!
Jesus does not end the matter there, though.
He observes: “I have other sheep, which are not
of this fold; those too I must bring in, and they
will listen to my voice, and they will become one

?

?ock, one shepherd.” (John 10:16) These “other
sheep” are “not of this fold.” Hence, they must
be of yet another fold, di?erent from the “little ?ock” who will inherit the Kingdom. These
two folds, or pens of sheep, have di?erent destinies. Still, the sheep in both folds will bene?t from Jesus’ role. He says: “This is why the
Father loves me, because I surrender my life.”
—John 10:17.

JESUS SPEAKS OF THE FINE SHEPHERD
AND THE SHEEPFOLDS

80

Many of the crowd respond: “He has a demon and is out of his mind.” Yet others show
that they are listening with interest and are inclined to follow the Fine Shepherd. They say:
“These are not the sayings of a demonized man.
A demon cannot open blind people’s eyes, can
it?” (John 10:20, 21) They evidently are referring to Jesus’ earlier curing of the man born
blind.

 What could the Jews understand as Jesus mentions sheep and sheepfolds?
 Who does Jesus say is the Fine Shepherd, and to what will he lead the sheep?
 Into what two folds are the sheep who follow Jesus to be led?
187

ONE WITH THE FATHER, BUT NOT GOD
JOHN 10:22- 42

Jesus has come to Jerusalem for the Festival of Dedication (or, Hanukkah). This festival
commemorates the rededication of the temple.
Over a century earlier, Syrian King Antiochus IV
Epiphanes built an altar over the great altar
at God’s temple. Later, sons of a Jewish priest
recaptured Jerusalem and rededicated the
temple to Jehovah. Since then, an annual celebration is held on Chislev 25, the month corresponding to the late part of November and
the early part of December.
It is wintertime, the season of cold weather. Jesus is walking in the temple in the colonnade of Solomon. Here Jews encircle him and
demand: “How long are you going to keep us in
suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
(John 10:22-24) How will Jesus respond? He replies: “I told you, and yet you do not believe.”
Jesus has not told them directly that he is the
Christ, as he told the Samaritan woman at the
well. (John 4:25, 26) He has, though, revealed
his identity in saying: “Before Abraham came
into existence, I have been.”—John 8:58.
Jesus wants people to conclude for themselves that he is the Christ by comparing his
works with what was foretold the Christ would
do. This is why he at other times told his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah. But now he tells these hostile Jews outright:
“The works that I am doing in my Father’s name,
these bear witness about me. But you do not
believe.”—John 10:25, 26.
Why do they not believe that Jesus is the
Christ? He says: “You do not believe, because
you are not my sheep. My sheep listen to my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
I give them everlasting life, and they will by
no means ever be destroyed, and no one will
188

snatch them out of my hand. What my Father
has given me is something greater than all other things.” Jesus then tells them how close his
relationship with his Father is, saying: “I and
the Father are one.” (John 10:26-30) Jesus is
here on earth and his Father is in heaven, so he
cannot mean that he and his Father are literally one. Rather, they are one in purpose, being
united.
Jesus’ words so anger the Jews that they
again pick up stones to kill him. This does not
frighten Jesus. “I displayed to you many ?ne
works from the Father,” he says. “For which
of those works are you stoning me?” They respond: “We are stoning you, not for a ?ne work,
but for blasphemy; for you . . . make yourself a
god.” (John 10:31-33) Jesus never claimed to
be a god, so why this accusation?
Well, Jesus is saying that he has powers that
the Jews believe belong to God alone. For example, regarding the “sheep” he said: “I give them
everlasting life,” which is something humans
cannot do. (John 10:28) The Jews are overlooking the fact that Jesus has openly admitted that
he received authority from his Father.
In refuting their false charge, Jesus asks: “Is
it not written in your Law [at Psalm 82:6], ‘I
said: “You are gods” ’? If he called ‘gods’ those
against whom the word of God came . . . do you
say to me whom the Father sancti?ed and sent
into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said,
‘I am God’s Son’?”—John 10:34-36.
Yes, the Scriptures call even unjust human
judges “gods.” So how can these Jews fault
Jesus for saying “I am God’s Son”? He points to
something that should convince them: “If I am
not doing the works of my Father, do not believe
me. But if I am doing them, even though you do

?

not believe me, believe the works, so that you
may come to know and may continue knowing
that the Father is in union with me and I am in
union with the Father.”—John 10:37, 38.
In response, the Jews try to seize Jesus, but
he again escapes. He leaves Jerusalem and
goes across the Jordan River to the area where

? “I AND THE FATHER ARE ONE”
JESUS REFUTES CHARGE OF BEING GOD

81

John began baptizing nearly four years earlier.
This apparently is not far from the southern end
of the Sea of Galilee.
Crowds come to Jesus and say: “John did not
perform a single sign, but all the things John
said about this man were true.” (John 10:41)
Thus, many Jews put faith in Jesus.

 Why does Jesus call the people’s attention to his works?
 How are Jesus and his Father one?
 How does Jesus’ quotation from the Psalms disprove the Jews’ charge that he is making himself
a god or equal to God?
189

S E CT I O N

5
JESUS’
LATER MINISTRY
EAST OF
THE JORDAN

“MANY PUT
FAITH IN HIM.”
—JOHN 10:42

JESUS’ MINISTRY IN PEREA
LUKE 13:22–14:6

Jesus has been teaching and curing people in
Judea and Jerusalem. Then he crosses the Jordan River to teach from city to city in the district of Perea. Soon, though, he will be back in
Jerusalem.
While Jesus is in Perea, a man asks: “Lord,
are those being saved few?” The man may know
of debates among the religious leaders over
whether many will be saved or only a few. Jesus
shifts the issue from how many will be saved to
what must be done in order to be saved. “Exert
yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door,” he says. Yes, e?ort, a struggle, is
required. Why so? Jesus explains: “Many, I tell
you, will seek to get in but will not be able.”
—Luke 13:23, 24.
To illustrate the need for vigorous e?ort,
Jesus says: “When the householder gets up
and locks the door, you will stand outside
knocking at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to
us.’ . . . But he will say to you, ‘I do not know
where you are from. Get away from me, all
you workers of unrighteousness!’ ”—Luke 13:
25-27.
This illustrates the plight of a person who
comes late—apparently when it is convenient
for him—and ?nds that the door is shut and
locked. He should have come earlier, even if that
was inconvenient. It is like that with many who
could have bene?ted from Jesus’ being there
teaching them. They failed to seize the opportunity to make true worship their chief purpose
in life. Those to whom Jesus has been sent have
not, for the most part, accepted God’s provision
for salvation. Jesus says that they will ‘weep
and gnash their teeth’ when they are thrown
outside. Yet people “from east and west and
from north and south,” yes, from all nations,
192

“will recline at the table in the Kingdom of God.”
—Luke 13:28, 29.
Jesus explains: “There are those last [such
as non-Jews and downtrodden Jews] who will
be ?rst, and there are those ?rst [religiously
favored Jews who take pride in being descendants of Abraham] who will be last.” (Luke 13:
30) Their being “last” means that such ungrateful ones will not be in the Kingdom of God at all.

Some Pharisees now come to Jesus and advise him: “Get out and go away from here, because Herod [Antipas] wants to kill you.” Perhaps King Herod himself started this rumor to
cause Jesus to ?ee the territory. Herod may be
afraid that somehow he will become involved in
the death of another prophet, even as he was in
the killing of John the Baptist. But Jesus tells
the Pharisees: “Go and tell that fox, ‘Look! I am
casting out demons and healing people today

?

and tomorrow, and on the third day I will be
?nished.’ ” (Luke 13:31, 32) In calling Herod a
“fox,” Jesus may be alluding to how crafty foxes can be. However, Jesus will not be manipulated or rushed by Herod or anyone else. He is
going to carry out the assignment his Father
gave him, doing so according to God’s schedule, not man’s.
Jesus moves on in his journey toward Jerusalem because, as he says, “it cannot be that a
prophet should be put to death outside of Jerusalem.” (Luke 13:33) No Bible prophecy said
that the Messiah must die in that city, so why
does Jesus speak of being killed there? Because Jerusalem is the capital, where the
71-member Sanhedrin high court is located and
where those accused of being false prophets
would be tried. Furthermore, that is where animal sacri?ces are o?ered. Thus, Jesus realizes
that it would be inadmissible for him to be killed
elsewhere.
“Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the
prophets and stoner of those sent to her,” Jesus laments, “how often I wanted to gather
your children together the way a hen gathers
her brood of chicks under her wings! But you
did not want it. Look! Your house is abandoned
to you.” (Luke 13:34, 35) The nation is rejecting the Son of God and must face the consequences!

EXERTION TO GET THROUGH NARROW DOOR
? JESUS MUST DIE IN JERUSALEM

82

Before Jesus gets to Jerusalem, a leader of
the Pharisees invites him to his house for a meal
on the Sabbath. Those invited watch closely to
see what Jesus might do about a man present
who is su?ering from dropsy (a severe accumulation of ?uid, often in the legs and feet). Jesus
asks the Pharisees and the experts in the Law:
“Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath or not?”
—Luke 14:3.
Nobody answers. Jesus heals the man and
then asks them: “Who of you, if his son or bull
falls into a well, will not immediately pull him
out on the Sabbath day?” (Luke 14:5) Again,
they have no response to his sound reasoning.

 What does Jesus show is needed for salvation, and why are many locked out?
 Who are the “last” that become “?rst,” and the “?rst” that become “last”?
 About what may King Herod be concerned?
 Why does Jesus indicate that he will be killed in Jerusalem?
193

INVITATIONS TO A MEAL—WHOM DOES GOD INVITE?
LUKE 14:7-24

After he has healed the man su?ering from
dropsy, Jesus is still at the house of the Pharisee. Jesus observes other guests choosing
prominent places at the meal, and he uses this
as an opportunity to teach a lesson about humility.
“When you are invited by someone to a marriage feast,” Jesus says, “do not recline in the
most prominent place. Perhaps someone more
distinguished than you may also have been invited. Then the one who invited you both will
come and say to you, ‘Let this man have your
place.’ Then you will proceed with shame to take
the lowest place.”—Luke 14:8, 9.
Jesus next says: “When you are invited, go
and recline in the lowest place, so that when
the man who invited you comes, he will say to
you, ‘Friend, go on up higher.’ Then you will
have honor in front of all your fellow guests.”
This is much more than simply displaying good
manners. Jesus explains: “For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.” (Luke 14:10, 11)
Yes, he is encouraging his listeners to cultivate
humility.
Then Jesus states another lesson for the
Pharisee who invited him—how to provide a dinner that has real merit with God. “When you
spread a dinner or an evening meal, do not call
your friends or your brothers or your relatives
or your rich neighbors. Otherwise, they might
also invite you in return, and it would become a
repayment to you. But when you spread a feast,
invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you.”—Luke 14:12-14.
It is natural to invite friends, relatives, or
neighbors to a meal, and Jesus is not saying
194

that this is wrong. He stresses, however, that
providing a meal for the needy, such as the
poor, crippled, or blind, can bring a rich blessing. Jesus explains to his host: “You will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous ones.”
A fellow guest concurs, saying: “Happy is the
one who dines in the Kingdom of God.” (Luke
14:15) He sees what a privilege this would be.
However, not all have such appreciation, as Jesus goes on to illustrate:
“A man was spreading a grand evening meal,
and he invited many. He sent his slave out . . . to
say to the invited ones, ‘Come, because everything is now ready.’ But they all alike began to
make excuses. The ?rst said to him, ‘I bought a
?eld and need to go out and see it; I ask you,
have me excused.’ And another said, ‘I bought
?ve yoke of cattle and am going to examine
them; I ask you, have me excused.’ Still another said, ‘I just got married, and for this reason I
cannot come.’ ”—Luke 14:16-20.
Those are weak excuses! A man normally examines a ?eld or livestock before the purchase,
so it is not urgent to look at them afterward.
The third man is not preparing to marry. He
is already married, so that should not prevent
him from accepting an important invitation. On
hearing these excuses, the master angrily tells
his slave:
“Go out quickly to the main streets and the
alleys of the city, and bring in here the poor and
crippled and blind and lame.” After the slave
does so, there is still room. The master then
tells his slave: “Go out to the roads and the
lanes and compel them to come in, so that my
house may be ?lled. For I say to you, none of
those men who were invited will taste my evening meal.”—Luke 14:21-24.

?

What Jesus has just related well illustrates
how Jehovah God had Jesus Christ extend an
invitation to individuals to be in line for the
Kingdom of the heavens. The Jews, especially the religious leaders, were the ?rst to be invited. In the main, they rejected the invitation
throughout Jesus’ ministry. But the invitation
would not stop with them. Jesus clearly is suggesting that in the future a second invitation

? A LESSON IN HUMILITY
INVITED GUESTS MAKE EXCUSES

83

would be extended to lowly ones of the Jewish nation and to proselytes. Thereafter, there
would be a third and ?nal invitation to people whom the Jews viewed as unsuitable before
God.—Acts 10:28-48.
Yes, what Jesus is saying truly con?rms the
words of one of his fellow guests, who said:
“Happy is the one who dines in the Kingdom of
God.”

 How does Jesus convey a lesson about humility?
 How can a host provide a meal that has real merit with God, and why will it bring the host happiness?
 What point is Jesus making in his illustration of the evening meal?
195

DISCIPLESHIP—HOW SERIOUS?
LUKE 14:25-35

Jesus has taught valuable lessons while having a meal at the house of a leader of the
Pharisees. As Jesus continues his trip toward
Jerusalem, large crowds travel with him. Why?
Are they really interested in being his true
followers, no matter what that may require of
them?
As they travel along the way, Jesus says
something to them that may shock some: “If
anyone comes to me and does not hate his
father and mother and wife and children and
brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life,
he cannot be my disciple.” (Luke 14:26) But
what does he mean in saying this?
Jesus is not saying that all who become
his followers must literally hate their relatives.
Rather, he means that they must hate them in
the sense of loving them less than they love Jesus, not being like the man in his illustration
of the evening meal who turned down an important invitation because he just got married.
(Luke 14:20) The Jews’ ancestor Jacob is said
to have “hated” Leah and loved Rachel, meaning that he loved Leah less than her sister Rachel.—Genesis 29:31; footnote.
Note that Jesus says that a disciple should
hate “even his own life,” or soul. This means that
a true disciple must love Jesus more than he
loves his own life, even being willing to lose his
life if necessary. Clearly, becoming a disciple of
Christ is a serious responsibility. It is not to be
undertaken casually, without careful thought.
Discipleship may involve hardship and persecution, for Jesus says: “Whoever does not
carry his torture stake and come after me cannot be my disciple.” (Luke 14:27) Yes, a true
disciple of Jesus must be willing to undergo a
burden of reproach such as Jesus faced. Jesus
196

has even said that he will die at the hands of
his enemies.
So the crowds traveling with Jesus need to
analyze very carefully what it means to be a
disciple of Christ. Jesus emphasizes this with
an illustration. “For example,” he says, “who of
you wanting to build a tower does not ?rst sit
down and calculate the expense to see if he has
enough to complete it? Otherwise, he might lay
its foundation but not be able to ?nish it.” (Luke

14:28, 29) Thus, before becoming Jesus’ disciples, those traveling with him toward Jerusalem
should have ?rmly decided to carry out the responsibility fully. He underscores that thought
with another illustration:
“What king marching out against another
king in war does not ?rst sit down and take
counsel whether he is able with 10,000 troops
to stand up to the one who comes against him
with 20,000? If, in fact, he cannot do so, then
while that one is yet far away, he sends out a

?

body of ambassadors and sues for peace.” To
emphasize his point, Jesus says: “In the same
way, you may be sure that not one of you who
does not say good-bye to all his belongings can
be my disciple.”—Luke 14:31-33.
Of course, Jesus is not saying that only for
the crowds following him on the road. All who
learn of Christ must be willing to do what he is
saying here. This means that they need to be
ready to sacri?ce everything they have—their
belongings, even their life—if they are to be his
disciples. That is something to think and pray
about.
Now Jesus brings up a matter that he
touched on in his Sermon on the Mount when he
said that his disciples are “the salt of the earth.”
(Matthew 5:13) He likely meant that even as literal salt is a preservative, his disciples have
a preserving e?ect on people, protecting them
from spiritual and moral decay. Now, as his ministry draws to a close, he says: “Salt, to be sure,
is ?ne. But if the salt loses its strength, with
what will it be seasoned?” (Luke 14:34) His listeners know that some salt available then was
impure, mixed with earthy matter and thus of
little use.
So Jesus is showing that even those who
have long been his disciples must not let their
determination grow weak. If that were to hap-

THE COST OF BEING A DISCIPLE

84

pen, they would become useless, like salt that
has lost its strength. The world might then ridicule them. More than that, they would be un?t
before God, even bringing reproach upon his
name. Jesus stresses the importance of avoiding that outcome, saying: “Let the one who has
ears to listen, listen.”—Luke 14:35.

 What does Jesus mean in saying that a disciple must “hate” his relatives and even “his own life”?
 What is Jesus teaching by means of his illustrations about building a tower and about a king
with an army?
 What is the point of Jesus’ comments about salt?
197

REJOICING OVER THE SINNER WHO REPENTS
LUKE 15:1-10

At various times during his ministry, Jesus has
emphasized the importance of humility. (Luke
14:8-11) He is eager to ?nd men and women
who desire to serve God humbly. Up till now,
some of them may still be notorious sinners.
The Pharisees and scribes notice that such
individuals—people whom they consider unworthy—are drawn to Jesus
and his message. They
complain: “This man welcomes sinners and eats
with them.” (Luke 15:2)
The Pharisees and scribes
feel superior and treat the
common people like dirt
under their feet. Re?ecting the contempt they
have for such ones, the
leaders use the Hebrew
expression am ha·’arets, “people of the land
[earth]” to refer to them.
In contrast, Jesus treats all with dignity, kindness, and compassion. Many of the lowly ones,
including some who are known to be practicing sin, are thus eager to listen to Jesus. How,
though, does Jesus feel about and respond to
the criticism that he is receiving for helping
such lowly ones?
The answer becomes clear as he presents
a touching illustration, similar to one he earlier gave in Capernaum. (Matthew 18:12-14) Jesus presents things as if the Pharisees are righteous and safe in the fold of God. In contrast,
the lowly people are presented as ones who
have gone astray and who are in a lost state. Jesus says:
“What man among you with 100 sheep, on
losing one of them, will not leave the 99 behind
198

in the wilderness and go after the lost one until he ?nds it? And when he has found it, he puts
it on his shoulders and rejoices. And when he
gets home, he calls his friends and his neighbors together, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me,
for I have found my sheep that was lost.’ ”—Luke
15:4-6.
What application does Jesus make? He explains: “I tell you that in the same way, there will
be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over 99 righteous ones who have no
need of repentance.”—Luke 15:7.
Jesus’ mention of repentance must strike the
Pharisees. They consider themselves to be righteous and feel they have no need of repentance.
When some of them criticized Jesus a couple of
years earlier because he was eating with tax
collectors and sinners, he replied: “I came to
call, not righteous people, but sinners.” (Mark
2:15-17) The self-righteous Pharisees fail to see

?

ILLUSTRATIONS OF LOST SHEEP AND LOST COIN
? ANGELS IN HEAVEN REJOICE

85

their need to repent, and thus they bring no joy
in heaven. It is just the opposite when sinners
truly repent.
Reinforcing his point that the restoration
of lost sinners is a cause for great rejoicing
in heaven, Jesus presents another illustration,
one set in a family home: “What woman who
has ten drachma coins, if she loses one of the
drachmas, does not light a lamp and sweep her
house and search carefully until she ?nds it?
And when she has found it, she calls her friends
and neighbors together, saying, ‘Rejoice with
me, for I have found the drachma coin that I had
lost.’ ”—Luke 15:8, 9.
The application Jesus makes is similar to the
one he made after giving the illustration of the
lost sheep. He now says: “In the same way, I tell
you, joy arises among the angels of God over
one sinner who repents.”—Luke 15:10.
Imagine, God’s angels show deep interest in
the restoration of lost sinners! That is particularly signi?cant because the sinners who repent
and gain a place in God’s heavenly Kingdom will
have a position higher than that of the angels
themselves! (1 Corinthians 6:2, 3) Yet the angels do not feel jealous. How, then, should we
feel when a sinner turns to God in full repentance?

 Why does Jesus associate with known sinners?
 How do the Pharisees view the common people and Jesus’ having dealings with such ones?
 What lesson does Jesus teach with two illustrations?
199

THE SON WHO WAS LOST RETURNS
LUKE 15:11-32

Jesus has given the illustrations of the lost
sheep and the lost drachma coin while likely still
in Perea east of the Jordan River. The message
that both teach is that we should rejoice when
a sinner repents and returns to God. The Pharisees and the scribes have been critical of Jesus because he welcomes people of that sort.
But do such critics learn something from Jesus’
two illustrations? Do they grasp how our Father
in heaven feels toward repentant sinners? Jesus now gives a touching illustration that emphasizes this same important lesson.
The illustration involves a father who has two
sons, the younger son being the principal character of this illustration. Both the Pharisees and
the scribes, as well as others hearing what Jesus relates, should be able to learn from what
is said about this younger son. However, not to
be overlooked is what Jesus relates about the
father and the older son, for the attitudes they
display are instructive too. So think about all
three of these men as Jesus tells the illustration:

200

“A man had two sons,” Jesus begins. “The
younger one said to his father, ‘Father, give
me the share of the property that should come
to me.’ So he divided his belongings between
them.” (Luke 15:11, 12) Note that this younger
son is not seeking his inheritance because his
father has died. The father is still alive. Yet the
son wants his portion now so that he can be independent and do with it as he chooses. And
what is that?
“A few days later,” Jesus explains, “the younger son gathered all his things together and
traveled to a distant country and there squandered his property by living a debauched life.”
(Luke 15:13) Rather than remaining in the security of his home, with a father who cared for
his children and provided for them, this son
goes o? to another land. There he squanders
all his inheritance in wanton indulgence, pursuing sensual pleasures. Then he comes into hard
times, as Jesus goes on to relate:

?

“When he had spent everything, a severe
famine occurred throughout that country, and
he fell into need. He even went and attached
himself to one of the citizens of that country,
who sent him into his ?elds to herd swine. And
he longed to be ?lled with the carob pods that
the swine were eating, but no one would give
him anything.”—Luke 15:14-16.
God’s Law categorized pigs as unclean, yet
this son has to work as a herder of swine. He is
racked with hunger, which reduces him to wanting to eat what normally is food only for animals, the pigs he is herding. In the son’s calamity and despair, “he came to his senses.”
What does he do? He says to himself: “How
many of my father’s hired men have more than
enough bread, while I am dying here from hunger! I will get up and travel to my father and say
to him: ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven
and against you. I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your
hired men.’ ” Then he gets up and goes to his
father.—Luke 15:17-20.
How will his father react? Will he turn on his
son angrily and scold him about the folly of
leaving home in the ?rst place? Will the father
display an indi?erent, unwelcoming attitude? If
it were you, how would you react? What if it
were your son or daughter?

 To whom does Jesus tell this illustration,
and why?
 Who may be considered the principal character,
and what happens to him?

ILLUSTRATION OF THE SON WHO WAS LOST

86

THE LOST SON IS FOUND

Jesus describes how the father feels and
acts: “While [the son] was still a long way o?,
his father caught sight of him and was moved
with pity, and he ran and embraced him and
tenderly kissed him.” (Luke 15:20) Even if the
father has heard of his son’s debauched living,
he welcomes his son back. Will the Jewish leaders, who claim to know and worship Jehovah,
see from this how our heavenly Father feels toward repentant sinners? Will they also recognize that Jesus has been showing the same welcoming spirit?
The discerning father can likely conclude
from his son’s sad, downcast countenance that
he is repentant. Still, the father’s loving initiative to greet him makes it easier for his son to
confess his sins. Jesus relates: “Then the son
said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy of
being called your son.’ ”—Luke 15:21.
The father orders his slaves: “Quick! bring out
a robe, the best one, and clothe him with it, and
put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet.
Also bring the fattened calf, slaughter it, and let
us eat and celebrate, for this son of mine was
dead but has come to life again; he was lost
and has been found.” Then they start “to enjoy
themselves.”—Luke 15:22-24.
Meanwhile, the father’s older son is in the
?eld. Jesus says about him: “As he returned
and got near the house, he heard music and
dancing. So he called one of the servants to
him and asked what was happening. He said to
him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father
slaughtered the fattened calf because he got
him back in good health.’ But he became angry
and refused to go in. Then his father came out
and began to plead with him. In reply he said
to his father, ‘Look! These many years I have
slaved for you and never once did I disobey
your orders, and yet you never once gave me a

young goat to enjoy with my friends. But as
soon as this son of yours arrived who squandered your belongings with prostitutes, you
slaughtered the fattened calf for him.’ ”—Luke
15:25-30.
Who, like the older son, have been critical
of the mercy and attention that Jesus has accorded the common people and sinners? The
scribes and the Pharisees. Their criticism of
Jesus’ welcoming sinners has prompted this
illustration. Of course, anyone critical of God’s
showing mercy should take the lesson to heart.
Jesus concludes his illustration by relating
the father’s appeal to his older son: “My son,
you have always been with me, and all the

things that are mine are yours. But we just had
to celebrate and rejoice, for your brother was
dead but has come to life; he was lost and has
been found.”—Luke 15:31, 32.
Jesus does not reveal what the older son
eventually does. However, after Jesus’ death
and resurrection, “a large crowd of priests began to be obedient to the faith.” (Acts 6:7)
That might have included some of the very ones
who hear Jesus relate this powerful illustration
about the son who was lost. Yes, it was possible even for them to come to their senses, repent, and return to God.
From that day forward, Jesus’ disciples can
and should take to heart key lessons that he set
out in this ?ne illustration. An initial lesson is
how truly wise it is to remain in the security of
God’s people, under the care of our Father who
loves us and provides for us, instead of wandering o? after tempting pleasures in “a distant
country.”
Another lesson is that if any of us should deviate from God’s way, we must humbly return to
our Father so as to enjoy his favor again.
Still another lesson can be seen by the contrast between the father’s receptive, forgiving
spirit and the older brother’s resentful, unwelcoming attitude. Clearly, God’s servants want
to be forgiving and welcoming if one who had
strayed truly repents and returns to ‘the Father’s house.’ Let us rejoice that our brother
who ‘was dead has come to life’ and that he who
‘was lost has been found.’

 When the younger son returns, how does his father respond?
 How does the compassionate father re?ect the ways of Jehovah and Jesus?
 In what sense does the older son’s reaction mirror the way the scribes and the Pharisees behave?
 What lessons do you ?nd in Jesus’ illustration?
203

PLAN AHEAD—USE PRACTICAL WISDOM
LUKE 16:1-13

The illustration of the lost son, which Jesus just
related, should have impressed on listening tax
collectors, scribes, and Pharisees that God is
willing to forgive repentant sinners. (Luke 15:
1-7, 11) Now Jesus addresses his disciples. He
uses another illustration, this time about a rich
man who learns that his house manager, or
steward, has not acted properly.

Jesus relates that the steward has been accused of mishandling his master’s goods. So
the master says that the steward will be dismissed. “What am I to do,” the steward wonders, “seeing that my master is taking the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough
to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.” To deal with
what lies ahead, he concludes: “I know what I
will do, so that when I am removed from the
stewardship, people will welcome me into their
homes.” He immediately calls those who are in
debt, asking them: “How much do you owe my
master?”—Luke 16:3-5.
204

The ?rst one answers: “A hundred measures
of olive oil.” That is some 580 gallons of oil. The
debtor might have had an extensive olive grove
or been a merchant who sold oil. The steward
tells him: “Take back your written agreement
and sit down and quickly write 50 [290 gallons].”—Luke 16:6.
The steward asks another one: “Now you,
how much do you owe?” The reply is: “A hundred large measures of wheat.” That is some
20,000 dry quarts. The steward tells this debtor: “Take back your written agreement and write
80.” He thus reduces the debt by 20 percent.
—Luke 16:7.
The steward is still in charge of his master’s ?nancial a?airs, so in a sense he does
have jurisdiction over reducing what others owe
the master. By reducing the amounts owed, the
steward is making friends of those who may do
him favors after he loses his job.
At some point the master learns what has
happened. Though what was done means a loss
to him, he is impressed with the steward and
commends him because “though unrighteous,”
he “acted with practical wisdom.” Jesus adds:
“The sons of this system of things are wiser in a
practical way toward their own generation than
the sons of the light are.”—Luke 16:8.
Jesus is not condoning the steward’s methods, nor is he encouraging crafty business
dealings. What, then, is his point? He urges
the disciples: “Make friends for yourselves by
means of the unrighteous riches, so that when
such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.” (Luke 16:9) Yes, there
is a lesson here about being farsighted and
using practical wisdom. God’s servants, “the
sons of the light,” need to use their material

?

assets in a wise way, with the everlasting future
in mind.
Only Jehovah God and his Son can receive
someone into the heavenly Kingdom or the Paradise on earth under that Kingdom. We should
diligently cultivate friendship with them by using what material riches we have in supporting
Kingdom interests. Our everlasting future will
thus be assured when gold, silver, and other
material riches fail or perish.
Jesus also says that those who are faithful
in caring for and using whatever riches or material things they have will be faithful in caring for matters of greater importance. “Therefore,” Jesus points out, “if you have not proved
yourselves faithful in connection with the unrighteous riches, who will entrust you with
what is true [such as Kingdom interests]?”
—Luke 16:11.
Jesus is showing his disciples that much will
be asked of them if they are to be received “into
the everlasting dwelling places.” One cannot be
a true servant of God and at the same time be
a slave to unrighteous, material riches. Jesus
concludes: “No servant can be a slave to two
masters, for either he will hate the one and love
the other, or he will stick to the one and despise
the other. You cannot be slaves to God and to
Riches.”—Luke 16:9, 13.

 In Jesus’ illustration, how does the steward make
friends of those who can help him later?
 What are “unrighteous riches,” and how can a
Christian “make friends” by means of them?
 Who can receive us “into the everlasting dwelling
places” if we are faithful in using whatever
“unrighteous riches” we have?

ILLUSTRATION OF THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD
? “MAKE FRIENDS” BY MEANS OF YOUR RICHES

87

A CHANGE FOR THE RICH MAN AND FOR LAZARUS
LUKE 16:14-31

Jesus has been giving his disciples ?ne counsel about the use of material riches. But his
disciples are not the only ones listening. Pharisees are also present, and they ought to take
to heart Jesus’ counsel. Why? Because they are
“money lovers.” On hearing what Jesus is saying, they ‘begin to sneer at him.’—Luke 15:2; 16:
13, 14.
That does not intimidate Jesus, though. He
says to them: “You are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows
your hearts. For what is considered exalted by
men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.”—Luke
16:15.
The Pharisees have long been “exalted by
men,” but this is a time of change, a time for
the tables to turn. The highly exalted ones who
are rich in worldly goods, political power, and
religious in?uence are to be brought down. The
common people who recognize their spiritual
need are to be raised up. Jesus makes it clear
that a major change is taking place, saying:
“The Law and the Prophets were until John.
From then on, the Kingdom of God is being declared as good news, and every sort of person is pressing forward toward it. Indeed, it is
easier for heaven and earth to pass away than
for one stroke of a letter of the Law to go unful?lled.” (Luke 3:18; 16:16, 17) How do Jesus’
words indicate that a change is occurring?
The Jewish religious leaders proudly profess
adherence to the Law of Moses. Recall that
when Jesus restored sight to a man in Jerusalem, the Pharisees pridefully said: “We are disciples of Moses. We know that God has spoken to Moses.” (John 9:13, 28, 29) One purpose
of the Law given through Moses was to lead
humble ones to the Messiah, that is, to Jesus.
206

John the Baptist identi?ed Jesus as the Lamb
of God. (John 1:29-34) Starting with John’s
ministry, humble Jews, especially among the
poor, have been hearing about “the Kingdom
of God.” Yes, there is “good news” for all wanting to be subjects of God’s Kingdom and bene?t from it.
The Mosaic Law is not going unful?lled; rather, it has led to the Messiah. Moreover, the obligation to keep it is ending. For example, the
Law allowed for divorce on various grounds, but
now Jesus explains that “everyone who divorces
his wife and marries another commits adultery,
and whoever marries a woman divorced from
her husband commits adultery.” (Luke 16:18)
How such pronouncements enrage the legalistically minded Pharisees!
Jesus now relates an illustration that underscores the magnitude of the change that is taking place. It features two men—each of whose

?

status, or situation, changes dramatically. In
considering the illustration, bear in mind that
among those hearing it are money-loving Pharisees who are being exalted by men.
“There was a rich man,” Jesus says, “who
used to dress in purple and linen, enjoying himself day after day with magni?cence. But a beggar named Lazarus used to be put at his gate,
covered with ulcers and desiring to be ?lled
with the things dropping from the table of the
rich man. Yes, even the dogs would come and
lick his ulcers.”—Luke 16:19-21.
The Pharisees are money lovers, so is there
any doubt whom Jesus is illustrating by this
“rich man”? These Jewish religious leaders also
like to deck themselves out in costly, fancy
clothing. And beyond whatever actual wealth
they might have, they seem rich in the privileges
they enjoy and opportunities they have. Yes, illustrating them by a man clothed in royal purple re?ects their favored position, and the white
linen re?ects their self-righteousness.—Daniel
5:7.
How do these rich, proud leaders view the
poor, the common people? They contemptuously consider them am ha·’arets, or people of
the land (earth), who neither know the Law nor
deserve to be taught it. (John 7:49) That re?ects the situation of the “beggar named Lazarus,” who hungers for even the meager “things

 What contrast exists between the situation of the
Jewish religious leaders and that of the common
people?
 As Jesus indicates, what change takes place
beginning with John’s ministry?
 Who are like the rich man in Jesus’ illustration,
and who are like Lazarus?

ILLUSTRATION OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS

88

dropping from the table of the rich man.” Like
Lazarus covered with ulcers, the common people are looked down on, as if they are spiritually diseased.
That sad situation has existed for some time,
but Jesus knows that the time has come for a
great change in the condition of both those who
are like the rich man and those who are like Lazarus.

Jesus has just pointed to a change by saying
that ‘the Law and the Prophets were until John
the Baptist, but from then on the Kingdom of
God is being declared as good news.’ Hence, it
is with the preaching of John and Jesus Christ
that both Lazarus and the rich man die to their
former circumstances, or condition, and they
experience new positions relative to God.
Speci?cally, those of the humble or poor
class have long been spiritually deprived. But

THE CHANGE FOR THE RICH MAN
AND FOR LAZARUS

Jesus goes on to describe this dramatic
change in circumstances. “Now in the course of
time,” he says, “the beggar died and was carried o? by the angels to Abraham’s side. Also,
the rich man died and was buried. And in the
Grave he lifted up his eyes, being in torment,
and he saw Abraham from afar and Lazarus by
his side.”—Luke 16:22, 23.
Those listening to Jesus know that Abraham
is long dead and in the Grave. The Scriptures
make it clear that no one in the Grave, or Sheol, can see or speak, including Abraham. (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10) What, then, do these religious
leaders think that Jesus means with this illustration? What might he be indicating about the
common people and the money-loving religious
leaders?

208

they are being helped by and are responding to
the message about the Kingdom presented ?rst
by John the Baptist and then by Jesus. Formerly, they had to get by with what amounted to little ‘things dropped from the spiritual table’ of
the religious leaders. Now they are being fed
with essential Scriptural truths, particularly the
wonderful things Jesus is explaining. It is as if
they ?nally are in the favored position in the
eyes of Jehovah God.
In contrast, those in the rich and in?uential class of religious leaders refuse to accept
the Kingdom message that John proclaimed
and that Jesus has been preaching throughout
the land. (Matthew 3:1, 2; 4:17) In fact, they
are angered, or tormented, by that message,
which points to a coming ?ery judgment from
God. (Matthew 3:7-12) It would be a relief to the

money-loving religious leaders if Jesus and his
disciples would let up on declaring God’s message. Those leaders are like the rich man in the
illustration, who says: “Father Abraham, have
mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip
of his ?nger in water and cool my tongue, for I
am in anguish in this blazing ?re.”—Luke 16:24.
But that is not to happen. Most of the religious leaders will not change. They had refused
to “listen to Moses and the Prophets,” which
writings should have led them to accept Jesus
as God’s Messiah and King. (Luke 16:29, 31; Galatians 3:24) Nor do they humble themselves
and let themselves be persuaded by those poor
ones who accept Jesus and now have divine favor. Jesus’ disciples, for their part, cannot compromise or water down the truth just to satisfy
the religious leaders or give them relief. In his
illustration, Jesus describes this reality in the
words uttered by “Father Abraham” to the rich
man:
“Child, remember that you had your ?ll of
good things in your lifetime, but Lazarus for his
part received bad things. Now, however, he is
being comforted here, but you are in anguish.
And besides all these things, a great chasm has
been ?xed between us and you, so that those
who want to go over from here to you cannot,
neither may people cross over from there to us.”
—Luke 16:25, 26.
How just and ?tting it is that such a dramatic change takes place! It amounts to a reversal
of position between the proud religious leaders

and the humble ones who accept Jesus’ yoke
and are ?nally being refreshed and fed spiritually. (Matthew 11:28-30) This change will be
even more evident in a few months when the
Law covenant is replaced by the new covenant.
(Jeremiah 31:31-33; Colossians 2:14; Hebrews
8:7-13) When God pours out holy spirit on the
day of Pentecost 33 C.E., it will be unmistakably clear that, rather than the Pharisees and
their religious allies, Jesus’ disciples have God’s
favor.

 How does Jesus indicate a change in circumstances?
 The message preached by John and Jesus ?nds what response among the religious leaders,
and how does Jesus illustrate this?
 The religious leaders would like what to happen, but why will it not occur?
 When will the chasm between the religious leaders and Jesus’ disciples become even greater?
209

TEACHING IN PEREA ON THE WAY TO JUDEA
LUKE 17:1-10 JOHN 11:1-16

For a while, Jesus has been in the area “across
the Jordan” called Perea. (John 10:40) He now
travels south toward Jerusalem.
Jesus is not alone. His disciples are traveling
with him, as well as “large crowds,” including
tax collectors and sinners. (Luke 14:25; 15:1)
Pharisees and scribes, who are critical of what
Jesus is saying and doing, are also there. They
have much to think about after hearing Jesus
relate the illustrations about the lost sheep, the
lost son, and the rich man and Lazarus.—Luke
15:2; 16:14.
Perhaps with the criticism and sneering of his
opposers fresh in mind, Jesus turns his attention to his disciples. He touches on some points
that he earlier taught in Galilee.
For example, Jesus says: “It is unavoidable
that causes for stumbling should come. Nevertheless, woe to the one through whom they
come! . . . Pay attention to yourselves. If your
brother commits a sin, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him. Even if he sins seven times
a day against you and he comes back to you
seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive
him.” (Luke 17:1-4) That last comment may remind Peter of the question he had asked about
forgiving up to seven times.—Matthew 18:21.
Will the disciples be able to act in harmony with Jesus’ words? When they say to Jesus,
“Give us more faith,” he assures them: “If you
had faith the size of a mustard grain, you would
say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted
and planted in the sea!’ and it would obey you.”
(Luke 17:5, 6) Yes, even a degree of faith can
accomplish great things.
Jesus goes on to teach the importance of
having a humble, balanced view of oneself, saying to the apostles: “Which one of you who has
210

a slave plowing or shepherding would say to
him when he comes in from the ?eld, ‘Come
here at once and dine at the table’? Rather, will
he not say to him, ‘Get something ready for me
to have my evening meal, and put on an apron
and serve me until I ?nish eating and drinking,
and afterward you can eat and drink’? He will
not feel gratitude to the slave because he did
what was assigned, will he? Likewise, when you
have done all the things assigned to you, say:
‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have
done is what we ought to have done.’ ”—Luke 17:
7-10.
Each servant of God should understand the
importance of putting God’s interests ?rst. Furthermore, each should remember the privilege
that he has to worship God as a member of his
household.
Apparently soon after this, a messenger sent
by Mary and Martha arrives. They are the sisters
of Lazarus, and they live in Bethany of Judea.
The messenger relates: “Lord, see! the one you
have a?ection for is sick.”—John 11:1-3.
Though learning that his friend Lazarus is
very ill, Jesus is not paralyzed by grief. Instead, he says: “This sickness is not meant to
end in death, but is for the glory of God, so
that the Son of God may be glori?ed through
it.” He remains where he is for two days then
tells his disciples: “Let us go into Judea again.”
They protest: “Rabbi, just lately the Judeans
were seeking to stone you, and are you going
there again?”—John 11:4, 7, 8.
Jesus responds: “There are 12 hours of daylight, are there not? If anyone walks in daylight,
he does not stumble into anything, because he
sees the light of this world. But if anyone walks
in the night, he stumbles, because the light

?

is not in him.” (John 11:9, 10) He apparently
means that the time God has allotted for Jesus’
ministry is not yet completed. Until it is, Jesus
needs to use to the full the short time left for
him.
Jesus adds: “Lazarus our friend has fallen
asleep, but I am traveling there to awaken him.”
Evidently thinking that Lazarus is simply rest-

SERIOUSNESS OF STUMBLING
? FORGIVE AND SHOW FAITH

89

ing and that he will recover, the disciples say:
“Lord, if he is sleeping, he will get well.” Jesus
tells them outspokenly: “Lazarus has died . . .
But let us go to him.”—John 11:11-15.
Aware that Jesus could be killed in Judea, yet
desiring to support him, Thomas urges his fellow disciples: “Let us also go, so that we may
die with him.”—John 11:16.

 Where has Jesus been preaching?
 What teachings does Jesus repeat, and what situation does he use to illustrate his point about humility?
 Jesus receives what news, and why does Thomas mention dying with Jesus?
211

“THE RESURRECTION AND THE LIFE”
JOHN 11:17-37

Coming from Perea, Jesus arrives at the outskirts of Bethany, a village about two miles east
of Jerusalem. Mary and Martha, the sisters of
Lazarus, are mourning his recent death. Many
have come to console them.
Then someone tells Martha that Jesus is approaching, and she hurries to meet him. Martha
tells Jesus what she and her sister have likely
been thinking for four days: “Lord, if you had
been here, my brother would not have died.”

However, it is not that she has no hope. “I know
that whatever you ask God for, God will give
you,” Martha says. (John 11:21, 22) She feels
that Jesus might yet help her brother.
Jesus responds: “Your brother will rise.” Martha concludes that he is referring to a future
resurrection on earth, the hope that Abraham
and others had. And she expresses her belief
that this will surely occur: “I know he will rise
in the resurrection on the last day.”—John 11:
23, 24.
Yet, could it be that Jesus can provide im212

mediate relief in this case? He reminds Martha
that he has God-given power over death, saying: “The one who exercises faith in me, even
though he dies, will come to life; and everyone
who is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all.”—John 11:25, 26.
Jesus is not suggesting that his disciples
then alive will never die. Even he must die, as
he has told his apostles. (Matthew 16:21; 17:22,
23) Jesus is stressing that exercising faith in
him can lead to everlasting life. For many, such
life will be gained through a resurrection. However, faithful ones alive at the end of this system may never have to die at all. In either case,
everyone who exercises faith in him can be sure
of never facing permanent death.
But can Jesus, who just said, “I am the resurrection and the life,” help Lazarus, now dead for
days? Jesus asks Martha: “Do you believe this?”
She answers: “Yes, Lord, I have believed that
you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming into the world.” With faith that Jesus can do
something that very day, Martha hurries home
and tells her sister privately: “The Teacher is
here and is calling you.” (John 11:25-28) At that,
Mary leaves the house, soon to be followed by
others, who assume that she is going to Lazarus’ tomb.
Instead, Mary goes to Jesus, falls at his
feet weeping, and repeats the sentiments her
sister expressed: “Lord, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died.” Moved at
seeing Mary and the crowds weeping, Jesus
groans, becomes troubled, and even gives way
to tears. That touches the onlookers. But some
ask: ‘If Jesus could heal a man born blind,
could he not prevent this one from dying?’
—John 11:32, 37.

?

AFTER LAZARUS’ DEATH, JESUS ARRIVES
? “THE RESURRECTION AND THE LIFE”

90

 When Jesus arrives near Bethany, what is the situation?
 What basis does Martha have for belief in a resurrection?
 How does Jesus indicate that he can do something about Lazarus’ death?
213

LAZARUS IS RESURRECTED
JOHN 11:38-54

After Jesus meets Martha and then Mary near
Bethany, they go to the memorial tomb of Lazarus. It is a cave with a stone covering the entrance. “Take the stone away,” Jesus directs.
Martha expresses concern, not understanding
what Jesus intends to do. “Lord,” she says, “by
now he must smell, for it has been four days.”
But Jesus tells her: “Did I not tell you that if you

would believe you would see the glory of God?”
—John 11:39, 40.
So the stone is removed. Jesus then raises
his eyes and prays: “Father, I thank you that you
have heard me. True, I knew that you always
hear me; but I spoke on account of the crowd
standing around, so that they may believe that
you sent me.” Jesus’ public prayer shows to ob-

?

servers that what he is about to do is by means
of power from God. Then Jesus cries out with
a loud voice: “Lazarus, come out!” And Lazarus does come out, with his hands and feet still
bound with burial wrappings and his face covered with a cloth. “Free him and let him go,” Jesus says.—John 11:41-44.
Many Jews who have come to comfort Mary
and Martha see this miracle and put faith in Jesus. But others go o? and tell the Pharisees
what Jesus has done. The Pharisees and the
chief priests hold a meeting of the Jewish high
court, the Sanhedrin. That body includes the
high priest, Caiaphas. Some of them lament:
“What are we to do, for this man performs many
signs? If we let him go on this way, they will all
put faith in him, and the Romans will come and
take away both our place and our nation.” (John
11:47, 48) Though having heard eyewitness
testimony that Jesus “performs many signs,”
these men are not rejoicing over what God is
doing through him. Their prime concern is their
own position and authority.
That Lazarus has been raised from the dead
is a real blow to the Sadducees, who do not believe in the resurrection. Caiaphas, a Sadducee,
now speaks up, saying: “You do not know anything at all, and you have not reasoned that it
is to your bene?t for one man to die in behalf
of the people rather than for the whole nation

? THE RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS
THE SANHEDRIN PLAN TO KILL JESUS

91

to be destroyed.”—John 11:49, 50; Acts 5:17;
23:8.
In view of Caiaphas’ sacred o?ce, God causes him to say this—he does not do so “of
his own originality.” Caiaphas means that Jesus should be killed to prevent him from further
undermining the authority and in?uence of the
Jewish religious leaders. Yet, Caiaphas’ prophecy points to the fact that by his death, Jesus
would provide a ransom, not just for the Jews,
but for all “the children of God who were scattered about.”—John 11:51, 52.
Caiaphas succeeds in in?uencing the Sanhedrin to make plans to kill Jesus. Might Nicodemus, a member of the Sanhedrin who is friendly to Jesus, reveal these plans to him? In any
event, Jesus leaves the immediate Jerusalem
area, thus avoiding death before God’s appointed time.

 How do those who see the resurrection of Lazarus respond to it?
 What reveals the wickedness of members of the Sanhedrin?
 Despite Caiaphas’ intentions, what does God have him prophesy?
215

TEN LEPERS HEALED—ONE SHOWS GRATITUDE
LUKE 17:11-19

Frustrating the Sanhedrin’s plans to kill him, Jesus travels to the city of Ephraim, somewhat
northeast of Jerusalem. He stays there with his
disciples, away from his enemies. (John 11:54)
However, the time for the Passover of 33 C.E.
is approaching, so Jesus is soon on the move
again. He travels northward through Samaria
and up into Galilee, his last visit to this area prior to his death.
Early in the trip, while Jesus is traveling from
one village to another, he encounters ten men
who have leprosy. In some of its forms, this disease can result in gradual loss of body tissue,
such as that of the ?ngers, toes, or ears. (Numbers 12:10-12) God’s Law requires that a leper
call out “Unclean, unclean!” and that he live in
isolation.—Leviticus 13:45, 46.
Accordingly, the ten lepers keep at a distance
from Jesus. Yet, they cry out loudly: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!” On seeing the lepers, Jesus directs them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” (Luke 17:13, 14) He thus
shows respect for God’s Law, which authorizes
the priests to pronounce as cured lepers who
have recovered from their illness. Then they can
once again live among healthy people.—Leviticus 13:9-17.
The ten lepers have con?dence in Jesus’
miraculous powers. They head o? to see the

priests, even before they have been healed.
While they are on the way, their faith in Jesus is
rewarded. They begin to see and feel that they
have been restored to health!
Nine of the cleansed lepers continue on their
way. One does not. This man, a Samaritan, returns to look for Jesus. Why? The man is deeply grateful to Jesus for what has happened.
The former leper is “glorifying God with a loud
voice,” realizing that God is actually responsible for his restored health. (Luke 17:15) When
he ?nds Jesus, he falls down before him, thanking him.
To those around him, Jesus says: “All ten
were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are
the other nine? Did no one else turn back to give
glory to God except this man of another nation?” Then Jesus tells the Samaritan: “Get up
and be on your way; your faith has made you
well.”—Luke 17:17-19.
By healing the ten lepers, Jesus shows that
he has Jehovah God’s backing. Now one of the
ten is not only healed through Jesus’ act but is
likely on the way to life. We are not living at a
time when God is using Jesus to perform such
healings. However, by faith in Jesus, we can be
on the way to life—everlasting life. Do we show
that we are grateful, as that Samaritan man
did?

 Frustrating plans to kill him, Jesus travels to where?
 Why do the ten lepers stand at a distance, and why does Jesus tell them to go to the priests?
 In light of what happened to the Samaritan, what lesson should we re?ect on?
216

?

JESUS HEALS TEN LEPERS

92

THE SON OF MAN WILL BE REVEALED
LUKE 17:20-37

Jesus is still either in Samaria or in Galilee.
Pharisees now ask him about the arrival of the
Kingdom, which they expect to be with pomp
and ceremony. However, he says: “The Kingdom
of God is not coming with striking observableness; nor will people say, ‘See here!’ or, ‘There!’
For look! the Kingdom of God is in your midst.”
—Luke 17:20, 21.
Some may conclude that Jesus is saying that
the Kingdom reigns in the hearts of God’s servants. However, that cannot be the case, for the
Kingdom is not in the hearts of the Pharisees to
whom Jesus is speaking. Yet, it is in their midst
because the chosen King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus, is right there among them.—Matthew 21:5.
Likely after the Pharisees leave, Jesus provides additional details for his disciples about
the coming of the Kingdom. As to his presence
in Kingdom power, he ?rst warns: “Days will
come when you will desire to see one of the
days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.”
(Luke 17:22) Jesus is indicating that the reign
of the Son of man in the Kingdom is to be in the
future. Before that time arrives, some disciples
might anxiously look for it, but they will have to
continue waiting until it is God’s appointed time
for the Son of man to come.
Jesus continues: “People will say to you, ‘See
there!’ or, ‘See here!’ Do not go out or chase af-

218

ter them. For just as lightning ?ashes from one
part of heaven to another part of heaven, so the
Son of man will be in his day.” (Luke 17:23, 24)
How will Jesus’ disciples be protected against
chasing after false messiahs? Jesus says that
the coming of the true Messiah will be as lightning seen over a wide area. The evidence of his
presence in Kingdom power will be clearly visible to all observant onlookers.
Then Jesus makes comparisons with ancient
events to show what the attitudes of people will
be during that future period: “Just as it occurred
in the days of Noah, so it will be in the days of
the Son of man . . . Likewise, just as it occurred
in the days of Lot: they were eating, they were
drinking, they were buying, they were selling,
they were planting, they were building. But on
the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained
?re and sulfur from heaven and destroyed them
all. It will be the same on that day when the Son
of man is revealed.”—Luke 17:26-30.
Jesus is not saying that people in Noah’s
day and in Lot’s day were destroyed because
they pursued the normal activities of eating,
drinking, buying, selling, planting, and building. Noah and Lot and their families did at least
some of those things. But the other people were
doing so without paying any attention to God’s
will and were ignoring the time in which they

?

lived. Hence, Jesus is admonishing his disciples
to pay attention to God’s will and to be actively involved in doing it. He is thus showing them
the way to be preserved—that is, the way to
keep living—when God brings destruction in the
future.
The disciples will need to avoid becoming distracted by the things of the world around them,
“the things behind.” Jesus says: “On that day let
the person who is on the housetop but whose
belongings are in the house not come down to
pick these up, and likewise, the person out in
the ?eld must not return to the things behind.
Remember the wife of Lot.” (Luke 17:31, 32) She
became a pillar of salt.
Continuing his description of the situation
existing when the Son of man will reign as King,
Jesus tells his disciples: “In that night two people will be in one bed; the one will be taken
along, but the other will be abandoned.” (Luke
17:34) So some will gain salvation, but others
will be abandoned, losing their life.
The disciples ask: “Where, Lord?” Jesus responds: “Where the body is, there also the eagles will be gathered together.” (Luke 17:37)
Yes, some will be like farsighted eagles. These
disciples will gather to the true Christ, the Son
of man. At that future time, Jesus will provide
his disciples with lifesaving truth for those having faith.

 How is the Kingdom in the midst of the
Pharisees?
 In what way will Christ’s presence be like
lightning?
 Why will Jesus’ disciples need to be alert
when the Son of man comes?

? THE KINGDOM IS IN THEIR MIDST
WHAT WILL IT BE LIKE WHEN JESUS IS REVEALED?

93

TWO GREAT NEEDS—PRAYER AND HUMILITY
LUKE 18:1-14

Jesus has already told his disciples an illustration about being persistent in prayer. (Luke 11:
5-13) He may now be in Samaria or in Galilee,
and he again emphasizes the need not to give
up in praying. He does so with this further illustration:
“In a certain city there was a judge who had
no fear of God and no respect for man. There
was also a widow in that city who kept going to
him and saying, ‘See that I get justice from my

legal opponent.’ Well, for a while he was unwilling, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Although
I do not fear God or respect any man, because
this widow keeps making me trouble, I will see
that she gets justice so that she will not keep
coming and wearing me out with her demand.’ ”
—Luke 18:2-5.
As to the application, Jesus says: “Hear what
the judge, although unrighteous, said! Certainly, then, will not God cause justice to be done
for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and
night, while he is patient toward them?” (Luke
18:6, 7) What is Jesus thus indicating about his
Father?
220

Jesus certainly does not mean that Jehovah
God is in any way like the unrighteous judge.
His point involves a contrast: If even an unrighteous human judge will respond to persistent entreaties, God unquestionably will do so.
He is righteous and good and will answer if his
people do not give up in praying. We can see
that from what Jesus adds: “I tell you, [God]
will cause justice to be done to them speedily.”
—Luke 18:8.
The lowly and the poor often do not receive
justice, whereas the powerful and the rich often
are favored. But that is not God’s way. When the
time is ripe, he will justly see to it that the wicked are punished and that his servants receive
everlasting life.
Who have faith like that of the widow? How
many truly believe that God will “cause justice
to be done to them speedily”? Jesus has just illustrated the need to persist in prayer. Now, as
to faith in the power of prayer, he asks: “When
the Son of man arrives, will he really ?nd this
faith on the earth?” (Luke 18:8) The implication is that such faith may not be common when
Christ arrives.
Some who are listening to Jesus feel selfassured in their faith. They trust in themselves
that they are righteous, whereas they look down
on others. To such ones, Jesus directs this illustration:
“Two men went up into the temple to pray, the
one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector. The
Pharisee stood and began to pray these things
to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like
everyone else—extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers—or even like this tax collector. I fast twice
a week; I give the tenth of all things I acquire.’ ”
—Luke 18:10-12.

?

The Pharisees are known to make public displays of their seeming righteousness. They do so
to impress others. The usual occasions for their
self-imposed fasts are on Mondays and Thursdays, the days large markets are busy, when
many will see them. And they scrupulously pay
a tithe of even small plants. (Luke 11:42) A few
months earlier, they expressed their contempt
for the common people, saying: “This crowd who
do not know the Law [according to the Pharisees’ view] are accursed people.”—John 7:49.
Jesus continues his illustration: “But the tax
collector, standing at a distance, was not willing even to raise his eyes heavenward but kept

ILLUSTRATION OF THE PERSISTENT WIDOW
? THE PHARISEE AND THE TAX COLLECTOR

94

beating his chest, saying, ‘O God, be gracious
to me, a sinner.’ ” Yes, the tax collector humbly acknowledges his shortcomings. Jesus concludes: “I tell you, this man went down to his
home and was proved more righteous than that
Pharisee. Because everyone who exalts himself
will be humiliated, but whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”—Luke 18:13, 14.
Thus Jesus makes clear the need to be humble. That is bene?cial counsel for his disciples,
who have been reared in a society in which
the self-righteous Pharisees stress position and
rank. And it is valuable counsel for all of Jesus’
followers.

 Jesus makes what point in his illustration of the unrighteous judge who grants the widow’s request?
 What faith will Jesus look for when he arrives?
 Jesus’ followers need to avoid what attitude common among the Pharisees?
221

TEACHING ABOUT DIVORCE AND LOVE FOR CHILDREN
MATTHEW 19:1-15 MARK 10:1-16 LUKE 18:15-17

From Galilee, Jesus and his disciples cross
the Jordan River and take the route southward
through Perea. When Jesus was last in Perea, he
had stated for the Pharisees the divine standard on divorce. (Luke 16:18) Now they raise
that subject to test Jesus.
Moses wrote that a woman could be divorced
over “something indecent” on her part. (Deuteronomy 24:1) There are di?ering views as to
what constitutes grounds for divorce. Some believe that rather minor issues are included. So
the Pharisees ask: “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife on every sort of grounds?”—Matthew 19:3.
Rather than appeal to human opinion, Jesus
masterfully refers to God’s design of marriage.
“Have you not read that the one who created them from the beginning made them male
and female and said: ‘For this reason a man will
leave his father and his mother and will stick to
his wife, and the two will be one ?esh’? So that
they are no longer two, but one ?esh. Therefore,
what God has yoked together, let no man put
apart.” (Matthew 19:4-6) When God instituted
marriage between Adam and Eve, he did not
make provision for dissolving their marriage.
The Pharisees take issue with Jesus, saying:
“Why, then, did Moses direct giving a certificate of dismissal and divorcing her?” (Matthew
19:7) Jesus tells them: “Out of regard for your
hard-heartedness, Moses made the concession
to you of divorcing your wives, but that has not
been the case from the beginning.” (Matthew
19:8) That “beginning” was not in Moses’ day;
it was when God originated marriage in Eden.
Then Jesus presents an important truth: “I
say to you that whoever divorces his wife, ex222

cept on the grounds of sexual immorality
[Greek, por·neia], and marries another commits adultery.” (Matthew 19:9) Sexual immorality is thus the only Scriptural grounds for divorce.
The disciples are moved to say: “If that is the
situation of a man with his wife, it is not advisable to marry.” (Matthew 19:10) Clearly, one
contemplating marriage should consider it to
be permanent!
Regarding singleness, Jesus explains that
some are born eunuchs, being incapable of
marital relations. Others are made eunuchs, becoming disabled sexually. Yet, some suppress
their desire to enjoy sexual relations. They do so
in order to focus more fully on matters relating to the Kingdom. “Let the one who can make
room for [singleness] make room for it,” Jesus
urges his listeners.—Matthew 19:12.
People now begin to bring their young children to Jesus. However, the disciples scold the
people, likely wanting to keep Jesus from being bothered. On seeing this, Jesus becomes
indignant and says to them: “Let the young
children come to me; do not try to stop them,
for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive
the Kingdom of God like a young child will by
no means enter into it.”—Mark 10:14, 15; Luke
18:15.
What a ?ne lesson! To receive God’s Kingdom, we must be meek and teachable, like
young children. Jesus now shows his love for little ones by taking them into his arms and blessing them. And he has such tender love for all
who “receive the Kingdom of God like a young
child.”—Luke 18:17.

?

?

JESUS GIVES GOD’S VIEW ON DIVORCE
? THE GIFT OF SINGLENESS
THE NEED TO BE LIKE YOUNG CHILDREN

95

 How do the Pharisees test Jesus on the subject of divorce?
 According to Jesus, what is the divine standard regarding divorce?
 Why might some disciples choose to remain single?
 Jesus teaches what lesson through his dealings with young children?
223

JESUS ANSWERS A RICH YOUNG RULER
MATTHEW 19:16-30 MARK 10:17-31 LUKE 18:18-30

Jesus is still traveling through Perea toward Jerusalem. A rich young man runs up to him and
falls down on his knees before him. The man is
“one of the rulers,” perhaps serving as a presiding o?cer in a synagogue or as a member of the
Sanhedrin. “Good Teacher,” he inquires, “what
must I do to inherit everlasting life?”—Luke 8:
41; 18:18; 24:20.
“Why do you call me good?” Jesus replies.
“Nobody is good except one, God.” Likely the
young man uses “good” as a formalistic title,
which is what the rabbis do. Although Jesus is
good at teaching, he lets the man know that as
a title, “Good” belongs only to God.
“If, though, you want to enter into life, observe the commandments continually,” Jesus
advises him. So the young man asks: “Which
ones?” Jesus cites ?ve of the Ten Commandments—about murder, adultery, stealing, bearing false witness, and honoring one’s parents.
Then he adds a more important commandment: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”—Matthew 19:17-19.
“I have kept all of these,” the man answers.
“What am I still lacking?” (Matthew 19:20) He
may feel that he is lacking some good, heroic act that will qualify him for everlasting life.
Sensing the earnestness of his request, Jesus
‘feels love for him.’ (Mark 10:21) However, the
man has an obstacle before him.
The man is attached to his possessions, so
Jesus says: “One thing is missing about you:
Go, sell what things you have and give to the
poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and
come be my follower.” Yes, the man could distribute his money to the poor, who cannot repay him, and become a disciple of Jesus. But
likely with pity, Jesus sees him rise and turn
224

?

away sad. The man’s attachment to wealth, to
his “many possessions,” blinds him to true treasure. (Mark 10:21, 22) Jesus says: “How di?cult
it will be for those having money to make their
way into the Kingdom of God!”—Luke 18:24.
The disciples are astounded by these words
and by what Jesus next states: “It is easier, in
fact, for a camel to get through the eye of a sewing needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.” That moves the disciples to ask:
“Who possibly can be saved?” Is being saved
so challenging that it is beyond a man’s reach?
Jesus looks straight at them and replies: “The
things impossible with men are possible with
God.”—Luke 18:25-27.
Peter points out that they have made a choice
di?erent from that of the rich man, saying:
“Look! We have left all things and followed you;
what, then, will there be for us?” Jesus mentions
the ?nal outcome of their right choice: “In the
re-creation, when the Son of man sits down on
his glorious throne, you who have followed me
will sit on 12 thrones, judging the 12 tribes of
Israel.”—Matthew 19:27, 28.
Clearly, Jesus has in mind the future time on
earth when there will be a re-creation of conditions that existed in the garden of Eden. Peter
and the other disciples will be rewarded by ruling with Jesus over that earthly Paradise, a reward truly worth any sacri?ce they may make!

A RICH MAN ASKS ABOUT EVERLASTING LIFE

96

Yet the rewards are not all future. His disciples experience some right now. “There is no
one who has left house or wife or brothers or
parents or children for the sake of the Kingdom of God,” Jesus states, “who will not get
many times more in this period of time, and in
the coming system of things, everlasting life.”
—Luke 18:29, 30.
Yes, wherever his disciples go, they can enjoy
a brotherhood with fellow worshippers that is
closer and more precious than that enjoyed with
natural family members. Sadly, it seems that
the rich young ruler is going to lose out on that
blessing as well as the reward of life in God’s
heavenly Kingdom.
Jesus adds: “But many who are ?rst will be
last and the last ?rst.” (Matthew 19:30) What
does he mean?
The rich young ruler is among the “?rst,”
being among the leaders of the Jews. As an
observer of God’s commandments, he shows
much promise and much might be expected of
him. Yet he is putting riches and possessions
ahead of all else in life. In contrast, the common people of the land see in Jesus’ teaching
the truth and the way to life. They have been
“last,” so to speak, but they are now coming to
be “?rst.” They can look forward to sitting on
thrones in heaven with Jesus and ruling over
the Paradise earth.

 What kind of man approaches Jesus?
 Why does Jesus object to being called “good”?
 What rewards does Jesus promise his followers?
 How do the “?rst” become “last” and the “last,” “?rst”?
225

ILLUSTRATION OF THE WORKERS IN THE VINEYARD
MATTHEW 20:1-16

Jesus has just told his listeners in Perea that
“many who are ?rst will be last and the last
?rst.” (Matthew 19:30) He underscores this
statement with an illustration about workers in
a vineyard:
“The Kingdom of the heavens is like the master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard. After he had
agreed with the workers for a denarius a day,
he sent them into his vineyard. Going out also
about the third hour, he saw others standing
unemployed in the marketplace; and to those
he said, ‘You too go into the vineyard, and I
will give you whatever is fair.’ So o? they went.
Again he went out about the sixth hour and the
ninth hour and did likewise. Finally, about the
11th hour, he went out and found others standing around, and he said to them, ‘Why have you
been standing here all day unemployed?’ They
replied, ‘Because nobody has hired us.’ He said
to them, ‘You too go into the vineyard.’ ”—Matthew 20:1-7.
Jesus’ listeners likely think of Jehovah God
when they hear mention of “the Kingdom of
the heavens” and “the master of a house.” The
Scriptures present Jehovah as the owner of a
vineyard, which represented the nation of Israel. (Psalm 80:8, 9; Isaiah 5:3, 4) Those in the
Law covenant are likened to workers in the vineyard. Jesus, though, is not illustrating the past.
He is describing a situation existing in his time.
The religious leaders, like the Pharisees who
recently tried to test him on the subject of divorce, are supposedly laboring continually in
God’s service. They are like full-time workers
who expect full pay, the wage being a denarius
for a day’s work.
The priests and others in this group consider
226

the common Jews as serving God to a lesser extent, like part-time laborers in God’s vineyard.
In Jesus’ illustration, these are the men who are
employed “about the third hour” (9:00 a.m.) or
later in the workday—at the sixth, ninth, and
?nally the eleventh hour (5:00 p.m.).
The men and women who follow Jesus are
viewed as “accursed people.” (John 7:49) For
most of their lives, they have been ?shermen or
other laborers. Then, in the fall of 29 C.E., “the
master of the vineyard” sent Jesus to call these
lowly people to labor for God as Christ’s disciples. They are “the last” whom Jesus mentions,
the 11th-hour vineyard workers.
Finishing his illustration, Jesus describes
what occurs at the close of the workday: “When
evening came, the master of the vineyard said
to his man in charge, ‘Call the workers and pay
them their wages, starting with the last and
ending with the ?rst.’ When the 11th-hour men
came, they each received a denarius. So when
the ?rst came, they assumed that they would
receive more, but they too were paid at the rate
of a denarius. On receiving it, they began to
complain against the master of the house and
said, ‘These last men put in one hour’s work;
still you made them equal to us who bore the
burden of the day and the burning heat!’ But he
said in reply to one of them, ‘Fellow, I do you no
wrong. You agreed with me for a denarius, did
you not? Take what is yours and go. I want to
give to this last one the same as to you. Do I not
have the right to do what I want with my own
things? Or is your eye envious because I am
good?’ In this way, the last ones will be ?rst,
and the ?rst ones last.”—Matthew 20:8-16.
The disciples may wonder about that ?nal
part of Jesus’ illustration. How will the Jew-

?

THE “LAST” WORKERS IN THE VINEYARD BECOME “FIRST”

ish religious leaders, who imagine themselves
“?rst,” become “last”? And how will Jesus’ disciples become “?rst”?
Jesus’ disciples, whom the Pharisees and
others view as “last,” are in line to be “?rst,”
to receive full pay. With Jesus’ death, earthly Jerusalem is to be cast o?, whereupon
God will choose a new nation, “the Israel of
God.” (Galatians 6:16; Matthew 23:38) John
the Baptist pointed to such ones when he

97

spoke about a coming baptism with holy spirit. Those who have been “last” are to be the
?rst to receive that baptism and to be given the privilege of being witnesses of Jesus
“to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts
1:5, 8; Matthew 3:11) To the extent that the
disciples grasp the dramatic change Jesus is
pointing to, they may foresee facing extreme
displeasure from the religious leaders, who
become “last.”

 Why is it logical to understand Jehovah to be “the master of the vineyard,”
and who are “the workers” in it?
 What dramatic change is Jesus pointing to with this illustration?
 When does this change become evident?
227

THE APOSTLES AGAIN SEEK PROMINENCE
MATTHEW 20:17-28 MARK 10:32- 45 LUKE 18:31-34

As Jesus and his disciples complete their journey southward in Perea toward Jerusalem, they
cross the Jordan River near Jericho. Others are
traveling with them for the Passover of 33 C.E.
Jesus is walking on ahead of the disciples,
determined to be in the city on time for the
Passover. But the disciples are afraid. Earlier,
when Lazarus died and Jesus was about to go
from Perea into Judea, Thomas told the others: “Let us also go, so that we may die with
him.” (John 11:16, 47-53) So going to Jerusalem is risky, and the disciples’ fear is understandable.
To prepare them for what lies ahead, Jesus
takes the apostles aside and tells them: “We
are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man
will be handed over to the chief priests and the
scribes. They will condemn him to death and
hand him over to men of the nations to be
mocked and scourged and executed on a stake;
and on the third day he will be raised up.”—Matthew 20:18, 19.
This is the third time that Jesus has told
his disciples about his death and resurrection.
(Matthew 16:21; 17:22, 23) However, this time
he says that he will be executed on a stake. They
listen to him, yet they do not comprehend the
meaning. Perhaps they are expecting the restoration on earth of the kingdom of Israel, wanting to enjoy glory and honor in an earthly kingdom with Christ.
The mother of the apostles James and John,
who is apparently Salome, is among the travelers. Jesus has given these two apostles a name
meaning “Sons of Thunder,” no doubt because
of their ?ery disposition. (Mark 3:17; Luke 9:54)
For some time, these two have had the ambition
of being prominent in Christ’s Kingdom. Their
228

?

? JESUS AGAIN FORETELLS HIS DEATH
DEALING WITH THE APOSTLES’ DESIRE FOR PROMINENCE

mother is aware of that. She now approaches
Jesus in their behalf, bows before him, and asks
for a favor. Jesus replies: “What do you want?”
She says: “Give the word that these two sons of
mine may sit down, one at your right hand and
one at your left, in your Kingdom.”—Matthew
20:20, 21.
The request is really coming from James and
John. Having just outlined the shame and humiliation he will experience, Jesus says to them:
“You do not know what you are asking for. Can
you drink the cup that I am about to drink?”
They reply: “We can.” (Matthew 20:22) Still, they
likely do not really comprehend what this means
for them.
Nevertheless, Jesus tells them: “You will indeed drink my cup, but to sit down at my right
hand and at my left is not mine to give, but it
belongs to those for whom it has been prepared
by my Father.”—Matthew 20:23.
On learning about James and John’s request,
the other ten apostles are indignant. Might
James and John have been outspoken in the
earlier argument among the apostles about
who is the greatest? (Luke 9:46-48) Regardless, the present request reveals that the Twelve

98

have not applied the counsel Jesus has given
about conducting oneself as a lesser one. Their
desire for prominence persists.
Jesus decides to deal with this latest controversy and the ill will it is creating. He calls
the Twelve together and counsels them lovingly, saying: “You know that those who appear
to be ruling the nations lord it over them and
their great ones wield authority over them. This
must not be the way among you; but whoever
wants to become great among you must be
your minister, and whoever wants to be ?rst
among you must be the slave of all.”—Mark 10:
42-44.
Jesus brings up the example they should imitate—his example. He explains: “The Son of
man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many.” (Matthew 20:28) For some
three years, Jesus has been ministering in behalf of others. And he will yet do so to the extent of dying for mankind! The disciples need
that same Christlike disposition of desiring to
serve rather than to be served, to be a lesser
one rather than to be in a position of prominence.

 What does Jesus do to prepare his disciples for what lies ahead?
 Two apostles make what request of Jesus, and how do the other apostles react?
 How does Jesus deal with his apostles’ interest in being prominent?
229

JESUS HEALS BLIND MEN AND HELPS ZACCHAEUS
MATTHEW 20:29-34 MARK 10:46-52 LUKE 18:35–19:10

Jesus and those traveling with him arrive at Jericho, which is about a day’s journey from Jerusalem. In a sense, Jericho is a double city, the
older city being about a mile from the newer Roman city. As Jesus and the crowds make their
way out of one of these cities and approach the
other, two blind beggars hear the commotion.
One of them is named Bartimaeus.
On hearing that Jesus is passing by, Bartimaeus and his companion begin shouting:
“Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!” (Matthew 20:30) Some in the crowd sternly tell them
to be quiet, but the two cry out even louder.
Hearing the disturbance, Jesus stops. He asks
those with him to call whoever is shouting. They
go to the beggars and say to one of them: “Take
courage! Get up; he is calling you.” (Mark 10:49)
Excitedly, the blind man throws o? his outer
garment, leaps to his feet, and goes to Jesus.

230

“What do you want me to do for you?” Jesus
asks. Both blind men plead: “Lord, let our eyes
be opened.” (Matthew 20:32, 33) Moved with
pity, Jesus touches their eyes and, particularly
to one of them, says: “Go. Your faith has made
you well.” (Mark 10:52) The two blind beggars
receive sight, and doubtless both begin glorifying God. Seeing what has happened, the people also give praise to God. The formerly blind
men now begin to follow Jesus.
There are tremendous crowds around Jesus
as he passes through Jericho. Everyone wants
to see the one who has healed the blind men.
The people press in on Jesus from every direction; hence, some cannot even get a glimpse of
him. That is true of Zacchaeus. He is chief over
the tax collectors in and around Jericho. Because he is short, he cannot see what is going
on. So Zacchaeus runs ahead and climbs a sycamore (or, ?g-mulberry) tree along the route
that Jesus is taking. From up there, Zacchaeus
gets a good view of everything. As Jesus draws
near and sees Zacchaeus up in the tree, he
says: “Zacchaeus, hurry and get down, for today I must stay in your house.” (Luke 19:5) Zacchaeus climbs down and hurries home to welcome his distinguished visitor.
When the people see what is happening, they
begin to grumble. They feel that it is not right
for Jesus to be the guest of a man whom they
view as a sinner. Zacchaeus has become rich by
dishonestly extorting money while he is collecting taxes.
As Jesus enters Zacchaeus’ home, the people
complain: “He went as a guest to the house of
a man who is a sinner.” However, Jesus sees
in Zacchaeus the potential for repentance. And
Jesus is not disappointed. Zacchaeus stands

?
?

up and tells him: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone, I am restoring four
times over.”—Luke 19:7, 8.
What a ?ne way for Zacchaeus to prove that
his repentance is genuine! He can likely calculate from his tax records just how much he
had received from various Jews, and he vows to
make a fourfold restoration. That is even more
than God’s law requires. (Exodus 22:1; Leviticus 6:2-5) Moreover, Zacchaeus promises to
take half of his belongings and give them to the
poor.
Jesus is pleased with this evidence of Zacchaeus’ repentance and tells him: “Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is
a son of Abraham. For the Son of man came to
seek and to save what was lost.”—Luke 19:9, 10.
Recently, Jesus has focused on the situation
of ‘the lost’ with his illustration about the lost
son. (Luke 15:11-24) Now he has provided a
real-life example of someone who was as good
as lost but who has been found. The religious
leaders and their followers may complain about
Jesus and criticize him for giving attention to
ones like Zacchaeus. Still, Jesus continues to
look for and restore these lost sons of Abraham.

 Where, apparently, does Jesus meet two blind
beggars, and what does he do for them?
 Who is Zacchaeus, and how does he prove
his repentance?
 What lesson can be learned from Jesus’
treatment of Zacchaeus?

JESUS HEALS BLIND MEN AT JERICHO
TAX COLLECTOR ZACCHAEUS REPENTS

99

HIS ILLUSTRATION OF TEN MINAS
LUKE 19:11-28

Though Jerusalem is Jesus’ destination, he may
still be at the home of Zacchaeus with his disciples. They believe that “the Kingdom of God”
is soon to be set up with Jesus as King. (Luke
19:11) They misunderstand this matter, just as
they fail to grasp that Jesus must die. So he
gives an illustration to help them to see that the
Kingdom is yet a long way o?.
He says: “A man of noble birth traveled to a
distant land to secure kingly power for himself
and to return.” (Luke 19:12) Such a trip would
take time. Clearly Jesus is the “man of noble
birth” who travels to a “distant land,” to heaven, where his Father will give him kingly power.
In the illustration, before the “man of noble
birth” departs, he calls ten slaves and gives
each a silver mina, telling them: “Do business
with these until I come.” (Luke 19:13) Literal silver minas are valuable pieces of money. A mina
amounts to the wages that an agricultural worker earns in over three months.
The disciples may discern that they are like
the ten slaves in the illustration, for Jesus has
already likened them to harvest workers. (Matthew 9:35-38) Of course, he has not asked
them to bring in a harvest of grain. Rather,
the harvest consists of other disciples who can
?nd a place in the Kingdom of God. The disciples use what assets they have to produce more
heirs of the Kingdom.
What more does Jesus reveal in this illustration? He says that citizens “hated [the man of
noble birth] and sent out a body of ambassadors after him to say, ‘We do not want this man
to become king over us.’ ” (Luke 19:14) The disciples know that the Jews do not accept Jesus
—some even want to kill him. After Jesus’ death
and departure to heaven, the Jews in general
232

show their view of him by persecuting his disciples. These opposers make it clear that they do
not want Jesus as King.—John 19:15, 16; Acts
4:13-18; 5:40.
As for the ten slaves, how do they use
their minas until the “man of noble birth” receives “kingly power” and returns? Jesus relates: “When he eventually got back after having secured the kingly power, he summoned the
slaves to whom he had given the money, in order to ascertain what they had gained by their
business activity. So the ?rst one came forward
and said, ‘Lord, your mina gained ten minas.’
He said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because
in a very small matter you have proved yourself
faithful, hold authority over ten cities.’ Now the
second came, saying, ‘Your mina, Lord, made
?ve minas.’ He said to this one as well, ‘You too
be in charge of ?ve cities.’ ”—Luke 19:15-19.
If the disciples perceive that they are like the
slaves who use their assets to the full to make
more disciples, they can rest assured that Jesus will be pleased. And they can trust that
he will reward such diligence. Of course, not all
of Jesus’ disciples have the same circumstances in life nor the same opportunities or abilities.
Yet Jesus, who receives “kingly power,” will recognize and bless their loyal e?orts at disciplemaking.—Matthew 28:19, 20.
Note a contrast, though, as Jesus concludes
his illustration: “But another [slave] came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your mina that I kept hidden
away in a cloth. You see, I was in fear of you,
because you are a harsh man; you take what
you did not deposit, and you reap what you did
not sow.’ He said to him, ‘By your own words I
judge you, wicked slave. You knew, did you, that
I am a harsh man, taking what I did not depos-

?

it and reaping what I did not sow? So why did
you not put my money in a bank? Then on my
coming, I would have collected it with interest.’
With that he said to those standing by, ‘Take the
mina from him and give it to the one who has
the ten minas.’ ”—Luke 19:20-24.
For failing to work to increase the wealth of
his master’s kingdom, this slave experiences
loss. The apostles are anticipating Jesus’ reigning in the Kingdom of God. So from what he
says about this last slave, they likely perceive

JESUS’ ILLUSTRATION OF THE TEN MINAS

100

that if they are not diligent, they will not ?nd a
place in that Kingdom.
Jesus’ words must stimulate the loyal disciples to increased e?orts. He concludes: “I say
to you, to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who does not have, even
what he has will be taken away.” He adds that
his enemies, who do not want him “to become
king over them,” will experience execution. Then
Jesus resumes his trip up to Jerusalem.—Luke
19:26-28.

 What prompts Jesus’ illustration of the minas?
 Who is the “man of noble birth,” and what is the land to which he goes?
 Who are the slaves, and who are the citizens who show hatred?
 What is the di?erence between the slaves who are rewarded and the slave whose mina is taken away?
233

S E CT I O N

6
JESUS’
FINAL MINISTRY

“YOUR KING IS
COMING TO YOU.”
—MATTHEW 21:5

A MEAL AT SIMON’S HOUSE IN BETHANY
MATTHEW 26:6-13 MARK 14:3-9 JOHN 11:55–12:11

Leaving Jericho, Jesus heads for Bethany. The
trip involves a climb of some 12 miles over
di?cult terrain. Jericho is about 820 feet below sea level, and Bethany is about 2,000 feet
above sea level. Lazarus and his two sisters live
in the little village of Bethany, which is about
two miles from Jerusalem and on the eastern
slope of the Mount of Olives.
Many Jews have already arrived in Jerusalem for the Passover. They have come early
“to cleanse themselves ceremonially” in case
they have touched a dead body or done something else that makes them unclean. (John 11:
55; Numbers 9:6-10) Some of these who arrive
early gather at the temple. They speculate on
whether Jesus will come to the Passover.—John
11:56.
There is great controversy regarding Jesus.
Some religious leaders want to seize him to
put him to death. In fact, they have ordered
that if any learn of Jesus’ whereabouts, they are
to report to them ‘so that they can seize him.’
(John 11:57) These leaders have already tried
to kill Jesus after he resurrected Lazarus. (John
11:49-53) Understandably, some may doubt
whether Jesus will appear in public at all.
Jesus arrives at Bethany on Friday, “six days
before the Passover.” (John 12:1) A new day
(Sabbath, Nisan 8) begins at sundown. Thus,
he has completed the trip before the Sabbath.
He could not have traveled from Jericho on
the Sabbath—from sundown Friday to sundown
Saturday—for such travel is restricted by Jewish law. Jesus probably goes to Lazarus’ home,
as he has done before.
Simon, who also lives in Bethany, invites Jesus and his companions, including Lazarus, for
a meal Saturday evening. Simon is called “the
236

leper,” perhaps being a former leper whom Jesus had at some point healed. Re?ecting her
industrious character, Martha ministers to the
guests. Mary is particularly attentive to Jesus,
this time in a way that stirs controversy.
Mary opens an alabaster case, or small ?ask,
that holds about “a pound of perfumed oil, genuine nard.” (John 12:3) This oil is very precious,
its value (300 denarii) being the equivalent of
about a year’s wages! Mary pours the oil on Jesus’ head and on his feet and then wipes his
feet with her hair. The aromatic scent ?lls the
whole house.
The disciples are angry and ask: “Why has
this perfumed oil been wasted?” (Mark 14:4)
Judas Iscariot objects, saying: “Why was this
perfumed oil not sold for 300 denarii and given to the poor?” (John 12:5) Judas is not really
concerned about the poor. He has been steal-

?

JESUS RETURNS TO BETHANY, NEAR JERUSALEM
? MARY POURS PERFUMED OIL ON JESUS

ing from the money box he keeps for the disciples.
Jesus defends Mary, saying: “Why do you try
to make trouble for the woman? She did a ?ne
deed toward me. For you always have the poor
with you, but you will not always have me. When
she put this perfumed oil on my body, she did
it to prepare me for burial. Truly I say to you,
wherever this good news is preached in all the
world, what this woman did will also be told in
memory of her.”—Matthew 26:10-13.

101

He has now been in Bethany for more than a
day, and word of Jesus’ presence has spread
about. Many Jews come to Simon’s house not
only to see Jesus but also to see Lazarus,
“whom [Jesus] had raised up from the dead.”
(John 12:9) The chief priests now take counsel
to kill both Jesus and Lazarus. These religious
leaders feel that Lazarus’ being alive again is
the reason why many people are putting faith
in Jesus. How wicked these religious leaders
are!

 What are the Jews at the temple discussing?
 Why must Jesus have arrived in Bethany on Friday rather than on Saturday?
 What is Mary doing that stirs controversy, and how does Jesus defend her?
 What shows the great wickedness of the chief priests?
237

THE KING ENTERS JERUSALEM ON A COLT
MATTHEW 21:1-11, 14-17 MARK 11:1-11 LUKE 19:29- 44 JOHN 12:12-19

The next day, Sunday, Nisan 9, Jesus leaves
Bethany with his disciples and heads to Jerusalem. As they approach Bethphage, on the Mount
of Olives, Jesus tells two of his disciples:
“Go into the village that is within sight, and
you will at once ?nd a donkey tied and a colt
with her. Untie them and bring them to me. If
someone says anything to you, you must say,
‘The Lord needs them.’ At that he will immediately send them.”—Matthew 21:2, 3.
The disciples fail to see that Jesus’ instructions involve Bible prophecy. Later, however,
they grasp the ful?llment of Zechariah’s prophecy. He foretold that God’s promised King would
come into Jerusalem “humble and riding on a
donkey, on a colt, the foal of a female donkey.”
—Zechariah 9:9.
When the disciples come to Bethphage and
take the male colt and its mother, people standing nearby ask: “What are you doing untying the
colt?” (Mark 11:5) But when they hear that the
animals are for the Lord, they let the disciples
bring them to Jesus. The disciples place their
outer garments on the donkey and on its o?spring, but Jesus mounts the colt.
The crowd increases as Jesus rides toward
Jerusalem. Many spread their garments on the
road. Others cut branches from the trees or
“foliage from the ?elds” and spread them out.
They cry: “Save, we pray! Blessed is the one
who comes in Jehovah’s name! Blessed is the
coming Kingdom of our father David!” (Mark 11:
8-10) Pharisees in the crowd are upset over
these proclamations. They tell Jesus: “Teacher,
rebuke your disciples.” Jesus replies: “I tell you,
if these remained silent, the stones would cry
out.”—Luke 19:39, 40.
As Jesus views Jerusalem, he begins to weep
238

and says: “If you, even you, had discerned on
this day the things having to do with peace—but
now they have been hidden from your eyes.” Jerusalem will pay the price for willful disobedience. Jesus foretells: “Your enemies will build
around you a forti?cation of pointed stakes and
will encircle you and besiege you from every
side. They will dash you and your children within you to the ground, and they will not leave a
stone upon a stone in you.” (Luke 19:42-44)
True to Jesus’ words, Jerusalem’s destruction
comes in the year 70 C.E.
When Jesus enters Jerusalem, ‘the whole city
is in an uproar, saying: “Who is this?” ’ And
the crowds keep saying: “This is the prophet
Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee!” (Matthew 21:
10, 11) Those in the crowd who had seen Jesus
resurrect Lazarus tell others about that miracle. The Pharisees lament that they are getting
absolutely nowhere. They say to one another:
“The whole world has gone after him.”—John
12:18, 19.
As is his custom when visiting Jerusalem, Jesus goes to the temple to teach. There he cures
the blind and the lame. When the chief priests
and the scribes see what he is doing and hear
the boys in the temple cry out, “Save, we pray,
the Son of David!” they become angry. The religious leaders ask Jesus: “Do you hear what
these are saying?” He replies: “Did you never read this, ‘Out of the mouth of children and
infants, you have brought forth praise’?”—Matthew 21:15, 16.
Jesus looks around upon the things in the
temple. It is now late, so he leaves with the
apostles. Before Nisan 10 begins, he travels back to Bethany, where he spends Sunday
night.

?

? JESUS ENTERS JERUSALEM IN TRIUMPH
JERUSALEM’S DESTRUCTION IS FORETOLD

102

 When and in what manner does Jesus enter Jerusalem as King?
 How does Jesus feel when he views Jerusalem, and what prophecy does he utter?
 What happens when Jesus goes to the temple?
239

THE TEMPLE CLEANSED AGAIN
MATTHEW 21:12, 13, 18, 19 MARK 11:12-18 LUKE 19:45- 48 JOHN 12:20-27

Jesus and his disciples have spent three nights
in Bethany since they arrived from Jericho. Now,
early in the morning on Monday, Nisan 10, they
are heading to Jerusalem. Jesus is hungry. So
when he sees a ?g tree, he walks toward it.
Does it have ?gs?
It is now late March, but the season for ?gs
is not until June. Still, the leaves are out, having sprouted early. Thus, Jesus feels that there
might be early ?gs. He ?nds, though, that there
are none. The leaves have given the tree a deceptive appearance. Jesus then says: “Let no
one eat fruit from you ever again.” (Mark 11:14)
Immediately the tree starts to wither, the meaning of which is to be learned the next morning.
Before long, Jesus and his disciples reach Jerusalem. He goes to the temple, which he inspected the previous afternoon. Today he does
more than make an inspection; he takes action
similar to what he did three years earlier at the
Passover of 30 C.E. (John 2:14-16) This time
Jesus throws out “those selling and buying in
the temple.” He also overturns “the tables of
the money changers and the benches of those
selling doves.” (Mark 11:15) He does not even
let anyone carrying things to another part of the
city take a shortcut through the temple courtyard.
Why is Jesus taking decisive action against
those changing money and selling animals in
the temple? He says: “Is it not written, ‘My
house will be called a house of prayer for all
the nations’? But you have made it a cave
of robbers.” (Mark 11:17) His reason for calling
these men robbers is that they demand exorbitant prices from those who have to buy animals
needed for sacri?ce. Jesus views their dealings
as extortion, or robbery.
240

Of course, the chief priests, scribes, and principal ones of the people hear what Jesus has
done, and they respond with renewed e?orts to
have him killed. However, they face a problem.
They do not know how to do away with Jesus,
because the people are ?ocking to hear him.
Not only natural Jews but also proselytes,
converts to the Jews’ religion, have come for
the Passover. Among them are Greeks who have
come to worship at the festival. These approach
Philip, perhaps attracted by his Greek name,
and ask to see Jesus. Philip may be unsure
whether such a meeting is appropriate, so he
confers with Andrew. The two take the matter to
Jesus, who is apparently still at the temple.
Jesus knows that he is to die in a few days,
so this is not the time to satisfy people’s curiosity or to seek popularity. He responds to the two
apostles with an illustration, saying: “The hour
has come for the Son of man to be glori?ed.
Most truly I say to you, unless a grain of wheat
falls to the ground and dies, it remains just one
grain; but if it dies, it then bears much fruit.”
—John 12:23, 24.
One grain of wheat might seem of little value. Yet, if it is put into the soil and “dies” as a
seed, it can germinate and in time grow into
a productive stalk with many grains. Similarly, Jesus is one perfect man. Still, by his being faithful to God till his death, he will become the means of imparting everlasting life to
many who have a similar spirit of self-sacri?ce.
Thus, Jesus says: “Whoever is fond of his
life destroys it, but whoever hates his life in
this world will safeguard it for everlasting life.”
—John 12:25.
Jesus is not thinking of himself only, for he
says: “If anyone would minister to me, let him

?

JESUS CURSES A FIG TREE AND CLEANSES THE TEMPLE
? TO IMPART LIFE TO MANY, JESUS MUST DIE

follow me, and where I am, there my minister
will be also. If anyone would minister to me, the
Father will honor him.” (John 12:26) What a reward! Those honored by the Father will become
Christ’s associates in the Kingdom.
Bearing in mind the great su?ering and agonizing death that awaits him, Jesus says: “Now

103

I am troubled, and what should I say? Father, save me out of this hour.” But Jesus does
not want to avoid accomplishing God’s will. He
adds: “Nevertheless, this is why I have come to
this hour.” (John 12:27) Jesus is in agreement
with all that God has purposed, including his
own sacri?cial death.

 Why does Jesus expect to ?nd ?gs, though it is not yet the normal season for them?
 Why is it appropriate for Jesus to call those selling in the temple “robbers”?
 How can Jesus be compared to a grain of wheat, and how does he feel about the su?ering and death
that awaits him?
241

THE JEWS HEAR GOD’S VOICE—WILL THEY SHOW FAITH?
JOHN 12:28-50

At the temple on Monday, Nisan 10, Jesus is
speaking about his approaching death. Concerned about how God’s reputation will be affected, Jesus says: “Father, glorify your name.”
A mighty voice from the heavens responds: “I
have glori?ed it and will glorify it again.”—John
12:27, 28.
The people nearby are bewildered. Some
think that they heard thunder. Others say: “An
angel has spoken to him.” (John 12:29) However, it is Jehovah whom they just heard speaking! And this is not the ?rst time that humans
have heard God’s voice in connection with Jesus.
Three and a half years earlier, at Jesus’ baptism, John the Baptist heard God say of Jesus:
“This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.” Later, after the Passover of 32 C.E., Jesus was trans?gured before James, John, and
Peter. Those three men heard God declare:
“This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.” (Matthew 3:17; 17:5) But
now, this third time, Jehovah is speaking in a
way that many can hear!
Jesus says: “This voice has occurred, not for
my sake, but for your sakes.” (John 12:30) It is
proof that he truly is God’s Son, the foretold
Messiah.
Moreover, Jesus’ faithful life course both exempli?es the way humans should live and con?rms that Satan the Devil, the ruler of the world,
deserves to be executed. Jesus says: “Now
there is a judging of this world; now the ruler of
this world will be cast out.” Rather than being a
defeat, Jesus’ approaching death will be a victory. How so? He explains: “Yet I, if I am lifted
up from the earth, will draw all sorts of men to
myself.” (John 12:31, 32) By means of his death
242

on a stake, Jesus will draw others to himself,
opening the way to everlasting life.
In response to Jesus’ comment about being
“lifted up,” the crowd says: “We heard from the
Law that the Christ remains forever. How can
you say that the Son of man must be lifted up?
Who is this Son of man?” (John 12:34) Despite
all the evidence, including hearing God’s own
voice, most of them do not accept Jesus as the
true Son of man, the promised Messiah.
As he has done before, Jesus speaks of himself as “the light.” (John 8:12; 9:5) He urges the
crowd: “The light will be among you a little while
longer. Walk while you still have the light, so
that darkness does not overpower you . . . While
you have the light, exercise faith in the light,
so that you may become sons of light.” (John
12:35, 36) Then Jesus withdraws, because Nisan 10 is not the day for him to die. Passover
Nisan 14 is when he is to be “lifted up”—nailed
to a stake.—Galatians 3:13.
Looking back on Jesus’ ministry, it is clear
that prophecy was being ful?lled when the Jews
did not put faith in him. Isaiah foretold that
the eyes of people would be blinded and their
hearts would be hard so that they would not
turn around to be healed. (Isaiah 6:10; John 12:
40) Yes, most of the Jews stubbornly reject the
evidence that Jesus is their promised Deliverer,
the way to life.
Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, and many
other rulers “actually put faith” in Jesus. But will
they act in faith, or will they hold back, either
because they fear being expelled from the synagogue or because they ‘love the glory of men’?
—John 12:42, 43.
Jesus himself explains what putting faith in
him involves: “Whoever puts faith in me puts

?
?

faith not only in me but also in him who sent me;
and whoever sees me sees also the One who
sent me.” The truths that God instructed Jesus
to teach and that Jesus continues to proclaim
are vital, so much so that he can say: “Whoever
disregards me and does not receive my sayings has one to judge him. The word that I have
spoken is what will judge him on the last day.”
—John 12:44, 45, 48.

MANY HEAR GOD’S VOICE
THE BASIS FOR JUDGMENT

104

Jesus then concludes: “I have not spoken of
my own initiative, but the Father who sent me
has himself given me a commandment about
what to say and what to speak. And I know
that his commandment means everlasting life.”
(John 12:49, 50) Jesus knows that shortly he
will pour out his own lifeblood in sacri?ce for
humans who exercise faith in him.—Romans 5:
8, 9.

 With regard to Jesus, on what three occasions has God’s voice been heard?
 What rulers put faith in Jesus, but why might they not confess him openly?
 On what basis will people be judged “on the last day”?
243

A FIG TREE IS USED TO TEACH A LESSON ABOUT FAITH
MATTHEW 21:19-27 MARK 11:19-33 LUKE 20:1-8

Leaving Jerusalem on Monday afternoon, Jesus
returns to Bethany on the eastern slope of the
Mount of Olives. He likely spends the night at
the home of his friends Lazarus, Mary, and Martha.
Now it is the morning of Nisan 11. Jesus and
his disciples are on the road again, heading
back to Jerusalem where he will be at the temple for the last time. And it is the ?nal day of his
public ministry before he celebrates the Passover, institutes the Memorial of his death, and
then faces trial and execution.
En route from Bethany over the Mount of Olives toward Jerusalem, Peter notices the tree
that Jesus cursed the previous morning. “Rabbi, see!” he exclaims, “the ?g tree that you
cursed has withered.”—Mark 11:21.
But why did Jesus cause the tree to wither?
He reveals the reason in his response: “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not
doubt, not only will you do what I did to the ?g
tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be
lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen. And all the things you ask in prayer, having faith, you will receive.” (Matthew 21:21, 22)
He is thus repeating the point he made earlier
about faith being able to move a mountain.
—Matthew 17:20.
So by causing the tree to wither, Jesus provides an object lesson on the need to have
faith in God. He states: “All the things you
pray and ask for, have faith that you have received them, and you will have them.” (Mark
11:24) What an important lesson for all of Jesus’ followers! It is especially appropriate for
the apostles in view of the di?cult tests they
will soon face. There is yet another connection
244

between the withering of the ?g tree and the
quality of faith.
Like this ?g tree, the nation of Israel has a
deceptive appearance. The people of this nation are in a covenant relationship with God,
and they might outwardly appear to observe his
Law. However, the nation as a whole has proved
to be both lacking faith and barren of good
fruitage. They even reject God’s own Son!
Hence, by causing the unproductive ?g tree to
wither, Jesus demonstrates what the end will be
for this fruitless, faithless nation.
Shortly, Jesus and his disciples enter Jerusalem. As is his custom, Jesus goes to the temple and begins teaching. The chief priests and
elders of the people, likely having in mind what
Jesus did the day before to the money changers, challenge him: “By what authority do you
do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?”—Mark 11:28.
Jesus replies: “I will ask you one question.
Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. Was the baptism by John
from heaven or from men? Answer me.” Now his
opponents are the ones being challenged. The
priests and elders consult one another about
how to answer: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will
say, ‘Why, then, did you not believe him?’ But
dare we say, ‘From men’?” They reason this way
because they are in fear of the crowd, “for these
all held that John had really been a prophet.”
—Mark 11:29-32.
Those opposing Jesus cannot come up with
an appropriate answer. So they reply: “We do
not know.” Jesus, in turn, says: “Neither am I
telling you by what authority I do these things.”
—Mark 11:33.

?

THE WITHERED FIG TREE—A LESSON ABOUT FAITH
? JESUS’ AUTHORITY IS CHALLENGED

105

 Why is Nisan 11 signi?cant?
 Jesus teaches what lessons with the ?g tree that he caused to wither?
 How does Jesus confound those who ask by what authority he does things?
245

TWO ILLUSTRATIONS ABOUT VINEYARDS
MATTHEW 21:28- 46 MARK 12:1-12 LUKE 20:9-19

At the temple, Jesus has just confounded the
chief priests and the elders of the people, who
challenged him as to the authority by which he
is doing things. Jesus’ reply silences them. Then
he gives an illustration that exposes what kind
of people they really are.
Jesus relates: “A man had two children. Going
up to the ?rst, he said, ‘Child, go work today in
the vineyard.’ In answer this one said, ‘I will not,’
but afterward, he felt regret and went out. Approaching the second, he said the same. This
one replied, ‘I will, Sir,’ but did not go out. Which
of the two did the will of his father?” (Matthew
21:28-31) The answer is obvious—the ?rst son
is the one who in the end did his father’s will.
So Jesus tells his opposers: “Truly I say to
you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes
are going ahead of you into the Kingdom of
God.” The tax collectors and the prostitutes initially would not serve God. However, like the
?rst son, they later repented and now are serving him. In contrast, the religious leaders are
like the second son, professing to serve God
but really failing to do so. Jesus notes: “John
[the Baptist] came to you in a way of righteousness, but you did not believe him. However, the
tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him,
and even when you saw this, you did not feel regret afterward so as to believe him.”—Matthew
21:31, 32.
Jesus follows up that illustration with another. This time, Jesus shows that the religious leaders’ failure goes beyond neglecting
to serve God. They are actually wicked. “A man
planted a vineyard,” Jesus relates, “and put a
fence around it and dug a vat for the winepress and erected a tower; then he leased it
to cultivators and traveled abroad. In due sea246

son he sent a slave to the cultivators to collect
some of the fruits of the vineyard from them.
But they took him, beat him, and sent him away
empty-handed. Again he sent another slave to
them, and that one they struck on the head and
dishonored. And he sent another, and that one
they killed, and many others, some of whom
they beat and some of whom they killed.”—Mark
12:1-5.
Will those hearing Jesus understand the illustration? Well, they may remember Isaiah’s words
of criticism: “The vineyard of Jehovah of armies
is the house of Israel; the men of Judah are
the plantation he was fond of. He kept hoping
for justice, but look! there was injustice.” (Isaiah 5:7) Jesus’ illustration is similar. The landowner is Jehovah, and the vineyard is the nation of Israel, fenced in and protected by God’s
Law. Jehovah sent prophets to instruct his people and help them produce good fruitage.
However, “the cultivators” mistreated and
killed the “slaves” sent to them. Jesus explains:
“One more [the owner of the vineyard] had, a
beloved son. He sent him to them last, saying,
‘They will respect my son.’ But those cultivators
said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come,
let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
So they took him and killed him.”—Mark 12:6-8.
Now Jesus asks: “What will the owner of the
vineyard do?” (Mark 12:9) The religious leaders answer: “Because they are evil, he will bring
a terrible destruction on them and will lease
the vineyard to other cultivators, who will give
him the fruits when they become due.”—Matthew 21:41.
They thus unwittingly proclaim judgment
upon themselves, for they are among “the cultivators” of Jehovah’s “vineyard,” the nation of

?

Israel. The fruitage that Jehovah rightly expects
from such cultivators includes faith in his Son,
the Messiah. Jesus looks straight at the religious leaders and says: “Did you never read
this scripture: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone.
This has come from Jehovah, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?” (Mark 12:10, 11) Then Jesus
drives home his point: “This is why I say to you,

? ILLUSTRATION ABOUT TWO SONS
ILLUSTRATION OF VINEYARD CULTIVATORS

106

the Kingdom of God will be taken from you and
be given to a nation producing its fruits.”—Matthew 21:43.
The scribes and chief priests recognize that
Jesus “told this illustration with them in mind.”
(Luke 20:19) More than ever, they want to
kill him, the rightful “heir.” But they fear the
crowds, who consider Jesus a prophet, so they
do not try to kill him right then.

 Whom do the two sons in Jesus’ illustration represent?
 In the second illustration, who are represented by the “landowner,” “the vineyard,” “the cultivators,”
the “slaves,” and “the heir”?
 What does the future hold for “the cultivators”?
247

A KING CALLS THOSE INVITED TO A MARRIAGE FEAST
MATTHEW 22:1-14

As Jesus’ ministry draws to an end, he continues to use illustrations to expose the scribes
and the chief priests. Hence, they want to kill
him. (Luke 20:19) But Jesus is not ?nished exposing them. He relates another illustration:
“The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened
to a king who made a marriage feast for his
son. And he sent his slaves to call those invited
to the marriage feast, but they were unwilling
to come.” (Matthew 22:2, 3) Jesus introduces
his illustration by mentioning “the Kingdom of
the heavens.” Logically, then, the “king” must
be Jehovah God. What of the king’s son and
those invited to the marriage feast? Again, it is
not di?cult to identify the king’s son as Jehovah’s Son, who is there presenting the illustration, and to grasp that those invited are the
ones who will be with the Son in the Kingdom of
the heavens.
Who are the ?rst ones to be invited? Well,
to whom have Jesus and the apostles been

preaching about the Kingdom? It has been to
the Jews. (Matthew 10:6, 7; 15:24) This nation accepted the Law covenant in 1513 B.C.E.,
thereby coming ?rst in line to make up “a
kingdom of priests.” (Exodus 19:5-8) But when
would they actually be called to “the marriage
feast”? Logically, that invitation went out in
29 C.E. when Jesus began preaching about the
Kingdom of the heavens.
And how did most Israelites respond to the
invitation? As Jesus said, “they were unwilling
to come.” The majority of the religious leaders
and the people did not accept him as the Messiah and as God’s designated King.
Jesus indicates, though, that the Jews were
to have another opportunity: “Again [the king]
sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those invited:
“Look! I have prepared my dinner, my bulls and
fattened animals are slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the marriage feast.” ’
But unconcerned they went o?, one to his own

?

?eld, another to his business; but the rest, seizing his slaves, treated them insolently and killed
them.” (Matthew 22:4-6) That corresponds to
what would occur once the Christian congregation was established. At that time, the Jews still
had the opportunity to be in the Kingdom, yet
most spurned this call, even abusing ‘the king’s
slaves.’—Acts 4:13-18; 7:54, 58.
With what outcome for the nation? Jesus relates: “The king grew wrathful and sent his armies and killed those murderers and burned
their city.” (Matthew 22:7) The Jews experienced that in 70 C.E. when the Romans destroyed “their city,” Jerusalem.
Does their refusing the king’s call mean that
no one else would be invited? Not according
to Jesus’ illustration. He goes on to say: “Then
[the king] said to his slaves, ‘The marriage feast
is ready, but those invited were not worthy.
Therefore, go to the roads leading out of the
city, and invite anyone you ?nd to the marriage

ILLUSTRATION OF THE MARRIAGE FEAST

107

feast.’ Accordingly, those slaves went out to the
roads and gathered all they found, both wicked
and good; and the room for the wedding ceremonies was ?lled with those dining.”—Matthew
22:8-10.
Signi?cantly, the apostle Peter would later begin helping Gentiles—ones who were not Jews
by birth or conversion—to become true Christians. In 36 C.E., Roman army o?cer Cornelius
and his family received God’s spirit, coming in
line for a place in the Kingdom of the heavens
that Jesus mentioned.—Acts 10:1, 34-48.
Jesus indicates that not all who come to the
feast will ?nally prove acceptable to “the king.”
He says: “When the king came in to inspect the
guests, he caught sight of a man not wearing a
marriage garment. So he said to him, ‘Fellow,
how did you get in here without a marriage garment?’ He was speechless. Then the king said
to his servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot and
throw him into the darkness outside. There is
where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth
will be.’ For there are many invited, but few chosen.”—Matthew 22:11-14.
The religious leaders hearing Jesus may not
understand the meaning or implications of all
that he is saying. Nevertheless, they are displeased and more determined than ever to rid
themselves of the one causing them such embarrassment.

 In Jesus’ illustration, who is “the king,” who is
“his son,” and who are those ?rst invited to the
wedding feast?
 When is the call extended to the Jews,
and who afterward are invited?
 What is indicated by the fact that many are
called but few are chosen?
249

JESUS THWARTS ATTEMPTS TO ENTRAP HIM
MATTHEW 22:15- 40 MARK 12:13-34 LUKE 20:20- 40

Jesus’ religious enemies are upset. He has just
related illustrations that expose their wickedness. The Pharisees now conspire to ensnare
him. They try to get him to say something for
which he can be turned over to the Roman
governor, and they pay some of their disciples
to entrap him.—Luke 6:7.
“Teacher,” these say, “we know you speak
and teach correctly and show no partiality, but
you teach the way of God in line with truth:
Is it lawful for us to pay head tax to Caesar
or not?” (Luke 20:21, 22) Jesus is not fooled
by their ?attery, for behind it is hypocrisy
and cunning. If he says, ‘No, it is not right to
pay this tax,’ he can be accused of sedition

against Rome. But if he says, ‘Yes, pay this
tax,’ the people, cha?ng at being subject to
Rome, may misunderstand and turn on him.
So how does he answer?
Jesus responds: “Why do you put me to the
test, hypocrites? Show me the tax coin.” They
bring a denarius, whereupon he asks: “Whose
image and inscription is this?” “Caesar’s,”
they reply. Then Jesus gives the masterful direction: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things
to Caesar, but God’s things to God.”—Matthew
22:18-21.
The men are amazed at Jesus’ words. Silenced by his skillful reply, they leave. But the
day is not over, nor are the e?orts to entrap

?

him. After the Pharisees’ failed attempt, leaders of another religious group approach Jesus.
Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection, bring up a question involving the resurrection and brother-in-law marriage. They ask:
“Teacher, Moses said: ‘If any man dies without having children, his brother must marry his
wife and raise up o?spring for his brother.’ Now
there were seven brothers with us. The ?rst
married and died, and having no o?spring, he
left his wife for his brother. The same thing happened with the second and the third, through all
seven. Last of all, the woman died. So in the resurrection, of the seven, whose wife will she be?
For they all had her as a wife.”—Matthew 22:
24-28.
Drawing on the writings of Moses, which the
Sadducees accept, Jesus replies: “Is not this
why you are mistaken, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God? For
when they rise from the dead, neither do men
marry nor are women given in marriage, but
they are as angels in the heavens. But concerning the dead being raised up, have you not read
in the book of Moses, in the account about the
thornbush, that God said to him: ‘I am the God
of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob’? He is a God, not of the dead, but of the
living. You are very much mistaken.” (Mark 12:
24-27; Exodus 3:1-6) The crowds are astounded by that answer.

? CAESAR’S THINGS TO CAESAR
MARRIAGE IN THE RESURRECTION?
? THE GREATEST COMMANDMENTS

108

Jesus has silenced both the Pharisees and
the Sadducees, so now a coalition of these
religious opposers comes to test him further.
One scribe asks: “Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?”—Matthew
22:36.
Jesus answers: “The ?rst is, ‘Hear, O Israel,
Jehovah our God is one Jehovah, and you must
love Jehovah your God with your whole heart
and with your whole soul and with your whole
mind and with your whole strength.’ The second
is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater
than these.”—Mark 12:29-31.
At hearing the answer, the scribe responds:
“Teacher, you spoke well, in line with truth, ‘He
is One, and there is no other besides him’; and
to love him with one’s whole heart, with one’s
whole understanding, and with one’s whole
strength and to love one’s neighbor as oneself
is worth far more than all the whole burnt o?erings and sacri?ces.” Seeing that the scribe has
answered intelligently, Jesus tells him: “You are
not far from the Kingdom of God.”—Mark 12:
32-34.
For three days (Nisan 9, 10, and 11) Jesus
has been teaching in the temple. Some people, such as this scribe, have listened to him
with pleasure. But not the religious leaders,
who now lack “the courage to question him
anymore.”

 The Pharisees make what attempt to entrap Jesus, and with what result?
 When the Sadducees try to ensnare him, how does Jesus foil their attempt?
 In answering a scribe’s question, what does Jesus stress as very important?
251

DENOUNCING RELIGIOUS OPPOSERS
MATTHEW 22:41–23:24 MARK 12:35- 40 LUKE 20:41- 47

Religious opposers fail to discredit Jesus or to
entrap him and turn him over to the Romans.
(Luke 20:20) Now, while still at the temple on
Nisan 11, Jesus turns the tables on them and
shows his true identity. Taking the initiative,
he asks them: “What do you think about the
Christ? Whose son is he?” (Matthew 22:42) It is
well-known that the Christ, or Messiah, is to be
in David’s line. That is the answer that they give.
—Matthew 9:27; 12:23; John 7:42.
Jesus asks: “How is it, then, that David under
inspiration calls him Lord, saying, ‘Jehovah said
to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put
your enemies beneath your feet” ’? If, then, David calls him Lord, how is he his son?”—Matthew
22:43-45.
The Pharisees remain silent, for they are hoping for a human descendant of David who might
liberate them from Roman domination. But
drawing on David’s words recorded at Psalm
110:1, 2, Jesus establishes that the Messiah is
to be more than a human ruler. He is David’s
Lord, and after sitting at God’s right hand, he
will exercise power. Jesus’ reply silences his opposers.
The disciples and many others have been
listening. Now Jesus addresses them, warning
about the scribes and the Pharisees. Those men
have “seated themselves in the seat of Moses”
to teach God’s Law. Jesus instructs his listeners: “All the things they tell you, do and observe, but do not do according to their deeds,
for they say but they do not practice what they
say.”—Matthew 23:2, 3.
Jesus then gives examples of their hypocrisy, saying: “They broaden the scripturecontaining cases that they wear as safeguards.” Some Jews wore on the forehead or
252

on the arm these relatively small cases containing short passages from the Law. The Pharisees enlarge theirs to give the impression that
they are zealous about the Law. Also, they
“lengthen the fringes of their garments.” The
Israelites were to make fringes on their garments, but the Pharisees make sure that their
fringes are quite long. (Numbers 15:38-40)
They do all of this “to be seen by men.”—Matthew 23:5.
Even Jesus’ disciples could be a?ected by
a desire for prominence, so he counsels them:
“Do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your
Teacher, and all of you are brothers. Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth,
for one is your Father, the heavenly One. Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one,
the Christ.” How, then, should the disciples view
themselves and act? Jesus tells them: “The
greatest one among you must be your minister. Whoever exalts himself will be humbled,
and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
—Matthew 23:8-12.
Next, Jesus pronounces a series of woes on
the hypocritical scribes and Pharisees: “Woe
to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you shut up the Kingdom of the heavens
before men; for you yourselves do not go in,
neither do you permit those on their way in to
go in.”—Matthew 23:13.
Jesus condemns the Pharisees’ lack of spiritual values, as shown by the arbitrary distinctions they make. For example, they say: “If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing; but if
anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is
under obligation.” They thus show their moral
blindness, for they put more emphasis on the
gold of the temple than on the spiritual value

?

of Jehovah’s place of worship. And they “have
disregarded the weightier matters of the Law,
namely, justice and mercy and faithfulness.”
—Matthew 23:16, 23; Luke 11:42.
Jesus calls these Pharisees “blind guides,
who strain out the gnat but gulp down the cam-

? WHOSE SON IS THE CHRIST?
JESUS EXPOSES HYPOCRITICAL OPPOSERS

109

el!” (Matthew 23:24) They strain a gnat from
their wine because that insect is ceremonially
unclean. Yet, the way they disregard weightier
matters of the Law is like swallowing a camel, also a ceremonially unclean animal, only far
larger.—Leviticus 11:4, 21-24.

 When Jesus questions the Pharisees about what David said as recorded in Psalm 110,
why are they silent?
 Why do the Pharisees enlarge their scripture-containing cases and lengthen the fringes
on their garments?
 What counsel does Jesus give his disciples?
253

JESUS’ FINAL DAY AT THE TEMPLE
MATTHEW 23:25–24:2 MARK 12:41–13:2 LUKE 21:1-6

During Jesus’ last appearance at the temple,
he continues to expose the hypocrisy of the
scribes and Pharisees, openly calling them hypocrites. He uses illustrative language, saying:
“You cleanse the outside of the cup and of the
dish, but inside they are full of greediness and
self-indulgence. Blind Pharisee, cleanse ?rst
the inside of the cup and of the dish, so that the
outside of it may also become clean.” (Matthew
23:25, 26) While the Pharisees are scrupulous
when it comes to ceremonial cleanness and outward appearance, they are neglecting the inner
person and are failing to purify their ?gurative
heart.
Their hypocrisy is also manifest in their willingness to build and decorate tombs for the
prophets. Yet, as Jesus mentions, they “are
sons of those who murdered the prophets.”
(Matthew 23:31) This they have proved in their
e?orts to kill Jesus.—John 5:18; 7:1, 25.
Jesus then points to what awaits these religious leaders if they do not repent: “Serpents,
o?spring of vipers, how will you ?ee from the
judgment of Gehenna?” (Matthew 23:33) The
nearby Valley of Hinnom is used for burning
garbage, a graphic image of the permanent destruction awaiting the wicked scribes and Pharisees.
Jesus’ disciples will represent him as “prophets and wise men and public instructors.” How
will they be treated? Addressing the religious
leaders, Jesus says: “Some of [my disciples]
you will kill and execute on stakes, and some of
them you will scourge in your synagogues and
persecute from city to city, so that there may
come upon you all the righteous blood spilled
on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to
the blood of Zechariah . . . whom you mur254

dered.” He warns: “Truly I say to you, all these
things will come upon this generation.” (Matthew 23:34-36) That proves to be the case in
70 C.E. when the Roman armies destroy Jerusalem and many thousands of Jews perish.
Contemplating this frightful situation distresses Jesus. He says with sadness: “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and
stoner of those sent to her—how often I wanted to gather your children together the way a
hen gathers her chicks under her wings! But
you did not want it. Look! Your house is abandoned to you.” (Matthew 23:37, 38) Those hearing these words must wonder what “house” he
means. Could he possibly be referring to the
magni?cent temple there in Jerusalem, which
God seems to be protecting?
Then Jesus adds: “I say to you, you will by no
means see me from now until you say, ‘Blessed
is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!’ ”
(Matthew 23:39) He is quoting from the prophetic words of Psalm 118:26: “Blessed is the
one who comes in the name of Jehovah; we
bless you from the house of Jehovah.” Clearly,
once this material temple is destroyed, no one
will be coming to it in God’s name.
Jesus now moves to a section of the temple where there are trumpet-shaped treasury
chests. People can put contributions in the
small openings at the top. Jesus sees various
Jews doing just that, the rich “dropping in many
coins” as gifts. Then Jesus observes a poor widow who drops in “two small coins of very little
value.” (Mark 12:41, 42) No doubt Jesus knows
how pleased God is with her gift.
Calling his disciples over, Jesus says: “Truly
I say to you that this poor widow put in more
than all the others who put money into the trea-

?

JESUS FURTHER CONDEMNS THE RELIGIOUS LEADERS
? THE TEMPLE WILL BE DESTROYED
? A POOR WIDOW CONTRIBUTES TWO SMALL COINS

sury chests.” How is that so? He explains: “They
all put in out of their surplus, but she, out of her
want, put in everything she had, all she had to
live on.” (Mark 12:43, 44) How she di?ers in
thought and deed from the religious leaders!
As Nisan 11 progresses, Jesus leaves the
temple for the last time. One of his disciples
exclaims: “Teacher, see! what wonderful stones
and buildings!” (Mark 13:1) Indeed, some of the
stones in the temple’s walls are extremely large,
contributing to the impression of its strength

110

and permanence. It certainly seems strange,
then, that Jesus says: “Do you see these great
buildings? By no means will a stone be left here
upon a stone and not be thrown down.”—Mark
13:2.
After saying these things, Jesus and his
apostles cross the Kidron Valley and climb to
a spot on the Mount of Olives. At one point
he is with four of the apostles—Peter, Andrew,
James, and John. From that position, they can
gaze down on the magni?cent temple.

 What does Jesus do during his ?nal visit to the temple?
 Jesus foretells what future for the temple?
 Why does Jesus say that the widow contributed more than the rich?
255

THE APOSTLES ASK FOR A SIGN
MATTHEW 24:3-51 MARK 13:3-37 LUKE 21:7-38

256

?

? FOUR DISCIPLES ASK FOR A SIGN
FULFILLMENTS IN THE FIRST CENTURY AND BEYOND
? WE MUST KEEP ALERT

It is Tuesday afternoon, and Nisan 11 is drawing to a close. Also ending are days of intense activity here on earth for Jesus. By day he
has been teaching in the temple, and by night
he has lodged outside the city. There has been
great interest among the people, who “would
come to him early in the morning to hear him in
the temple.” (Luke 21:37, 38) Now that is past,
and Jesus is seated on the Mount of Olives with
four apostles—Peter, Andrew, James, and John.
These four have come to him privately. They
are concerned about the temple because Jesus has just foretold that not a stone of it will
be left upon a stone. They have more on their
minds, though. Jesus had earlier urged them:
“Keep ready, because at an hour that you do
not think likely, the Son of man is coming.”
(Luke 12:40) He had also spoken about the “day
when the Son of man is revealed.” (Luke 17:
30) Are those comments somehow related to
what he just said about the temple? The apostles are very curious. “Tell us,” they say, “when
will these things be, and what will be the sign
of your presence and of the conclusion of the
system of things?”—Matthew 24:3.
They may have in mind the end of the very
temple that they can see not far away. Also,
they ask about the presence of the Son of man.
They may recall that Jesus gave an illustration
about “a man of noble birth” who ‘traveled to
secure kingly power and then to return.’ (Luke
19:11, 12) And, ?nally, they wonder what “the
conclusion of the system of things” will involve.

111

In his detailed response, Jesus provides a
sign that identi?es when the existing Jewish
system of things, including its temple, will end.
But he provides more. This sign will help Christians in the future to know when they are living
during his “presence” and near the end of the
entire system of things on earth.
As the years go by, the apostles observe Jesus’ prophecy being ful?lled. Yes, many things
that he foretold start to occur in their lifetime.
Thus, alert Christians who are living 37 years
later, in 70 C.E., are not caught unawares by the
approaching destruction of the Jewish system
with its temple. However, not all that Jesus foretells actually takes place in the period leading
up to and including 70 C.E. Hence, what will yet
mark his presence in Kingdom power? Jesus reveals the answer to the apostles.
Jesus foretells that there will be “wars and reports of wars” and that “nation will rise against
nation and kingdom against kingdom.” (Matthew 24:6, 7) He also says that “there will be
great earthquakes, and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences.” (Luke
21:11) Jesus warns his disciples: “People will lay
their hands on you and persecute you.” (Luke
21:12) False prophets will arise and mislead
many. Lawlessness will increase, and the love
of the greater number will grow cold. Additionally, he says that the “good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth
for a witness to all the nations, and then the end
will come.”—Matthew 24:14.

 What prompts the apostles to ask about future events, but what else do they apparently have in mind?
 When does Jesus’ prophecy start to be ful?lled, and how?
 What are some conditions that are to mark Christ’s presence?

Although Jesus’ prophecy is ful?lled in some
respects prior to and during the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans, might Jesus be including a later, larger ful?llment? Do you see
the evidence that Jesus’ momentous prophecy has been undergoing its major ful?llment in
modern times?
One thing that Jesus includes in the sign
of his presence is the appearance of “the disgusting thing that causes desolation.” (Matthew 24:15) In 66 C.E., this disgusting thing
appears in the form of the “encamped armies”
of Rome, with their idolatrous standards, or
ensigns. The Romans surround Jerusalem and
undermine some of its walls. (Luke 21:20)
Thus, “the disgusting thing” is standing where
it ought not, in what the Jews consider “a holy
place.”
Jesus further foretells: “There will be great
tribulation such as has not occurred since the
world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur
again.” In 70 C.E., the Romans destroy Jerusalem. That destructive conquest of the Jews’
‘holy city,’ including its temple, proves to be a
great tribulation, with many thousands being
killed. (Matthew 4:5; 24:21) It is far greater than
any destruction the city and the Jewish people
have ever experienced, and it brings to an end
the organized system of worship that the Jews
had followed for centuries. Accordingly, any later, larger ful?llment of Jesus’ prophetic words
is certain to be horri?c.
CONFIDENCE DURING THE
FORETOLD DAYS

Jesus’ discussion with his apostles regarding
the sign of his presence in Kingdom power and
of the end of the system of things is far from
over. He now warns them about chasing after
“false Christs and false prophets.” Attempts will
be made, he says, “to mislead, if possible, even
the chosen ones.” (Matthew 24:24) But these
258

chosen ones will not be misled. False Christs
can make only a visible appearance. In contrast,
Jesus’ presence will not be visible.
Referring to a larger tribulation that would
break out at the end of the present system of
things, Jesus says: “The sun will be darkened,
and the moon will not give its light, and the
stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of
the heavens will be shaken.” (Matthew 24:29)
The apostles hearing those chilling words do
not know exactly what will occur, but it certainly will be awesome.
How will these shocking events a?ect mankind? Jesus says: “People will become faint out
of fear and expectation of the things coming
upon the inhabited earth, for the powers of the
heavens will be shaken.” (Luke 21:26) Indeed,
Jesus is describing what will be the darkest period of human existence.
Encouragingly, Jesus makes it clear to the
apostles that not all will be lamenting when ‘the
Son of man comes with power and great glory.’ (Matthew 24:30) He had already indicated
that God will intervene “on account of the chosen ones.” (Matthew 24:22) So how should such
faithful disciples react to the shocking developments that Jesus is outlining? Jesus encourages his followers: “As these things start to occur, stand up straight and lift up your heads,
because your deliverance is getting near.”
—Luke 21:28.
How, though, would Jesus’ disciples who are
living during this foretold period be able to determine the nearness of the end? Jesus gives
an illustration about a ?g tree: “Just as soon
as its young branch grows tender and sprouts
its leaves, you know that summer is near. Likewise also you, when you see all these things,
know that he is near at the doors. Truly I say to
you that this generation will by no means pass
away until all these things happen.”—Matthew
24:32-34.

Thus, when his disciples see the many different features of the sign being ful?lled, they
should realize that the end is near. Admonishing the disciples who will be alive during that
momentous period, Jesus says:
“Concerning that day and hour nobody
knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor
the Son, but only the Father. For just as the days
of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of
man will be. For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and
they took no note until the Flood came and
swept them all away, so the presence of the Son
of man will be.” (Matthew 24:36-39) The event
that Jesus uses as a parallel—the historic Flood
of Noah’s day—had a global impact.
The apostles listening to Jesus on the Mount
of Olives must undoubtedly recognize the
need to keep alert. Jesus says: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy
drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that
day be instantly upon you as a snare. For it
will come upon all those dwelling on the face of
the whole earth. Keep awake, then, all the time
making supplication that you may succeed in
escaping all these things that must occur and
in standing before the Son of man.”—Luke 21:
34-36.
Jesus is once again showing that what he
is foretelling is not of limited scope. He is
not prophesying about events that would occur in a few decades and that would a?ect only

the city of Jerusalem or the Jewish nation. No,
he is pointing to developments that “will come
upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole
earth.”
He says that his disciples will need to keep
alert, to be on the watch, and to be ready. Jesus underscores this warning with another illustration: “Know one thing: If the householder
had known in what watch the thief was coming,
he would have kept awake and not allowed his
house to be broken into. On this account, you
too prove yourselves ready, because the Son of
man is coming at an hour that you do not think
to be it.”—Matthew 24:43, 44.
Jesus goes on to give his disciples reason for optimism. He assures them that when
his prophecy is being ful?lled, there will be a
“slave” who is alert and active. Jesus draws on
a situation that the apostles can readily picture: “Who really is the faithful and discreet
slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? Happy is that slave if his master on
coming ?nds him doing so! Truly I say to you,
he will appoint him over all his belongings.”
If, though, the “slave” develops an evil attitude
and mistreats others, the master will “punish
him with the greatest severity.”—Matthew 24:
45-51; compare Luke 12:45, 46.
However, Jesus is not saying that a group
of his followers will develop an evil disposition.
What, then, is the lesson that Jesus wants to
impress upon his disciples? He wants them to
stay alert and active, as he makes clear in yet
another illustration.

 How does a “disgusting thing” appear, and what events follow its appearance?
 How will people react when they witness the ful?llment of Jesus’ prophecy?
 Jesus gives what illustration to help his disciples discern when the end is near?
 What indicates that the ful?llment of Jesus’ prophecy is global?
 What admonition does Jesus provide for his disciples living near the end of the system of things?
259

A LESSON IN VIGILANCE—THE VIRGINS
MATTHEW 25:1-13

Jesus has been answering his apostles’ question regarding the sign of his presence and of
the conclusion of the system of things. With this
in mind, he now gives them wise admonition by
means of an additional illustration. Its ful?llment would be observable by those living during his presence.
He introduces the illustration, saying: “The
Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten
virgins who took their lamps and went out to
meet the bridegroom. Five of them were foolish,
and ?ve were discreet.”—Matthew 25:1, 2.
Jesus does not mean that half of his disciples who inherit the Kingdom of the heavens are
foolish and the other half are discreet. Rather,

he is making the point that in connection with
the Kingdom, each of his disciples has the capacity to choose to be vigilant or to be distracted. Jesus has no doubt, though, that each of his
servants can remain faithful and receive his Father’s blessings.
In the illustration, all ten virgins go out to
welcome the bridegroom and to join the wedding procession. When he arrives, the virgins
will light the route with their lamps, honoring him as he brings his bride to the house
prepared for her. How do things work out,
though?
Jesus explains: “The foolish took their lamps
but took no oil with them, whereas the discreet

?

took oil in their ?asks along with their lamps.
While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.” (Matthew 25:3-5)
The bridegroom does not arrive as soon as expected. There seems to be a long delay, during
which the virgins fall asleep. The apostles may
recall what Jesus related about a man of noble
birth who went away and “eventually got back
after having secured the kingly power.”—Luke
19:11-15.
In the illustration of the ten virgins, Jesus
describes what happens when the bridegroom
?nally arrives: “Right in the middle of the night
there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go
out to meet him.’ ” (Matthew 25:6) What is the
situation of the virgins as to their preparedness
and vigilance?
Jesus continues: “Then all those virgins got
up and put their lamps in order. The foolish
said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil,
because our lamps are about to go out.’ The
discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may
not be enough for both us and you. Go instead
to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’ ”—Matthew 25:7-9.
So the ?ve foolish virgins are not vigilant and
are not prepared for the arrival of the bridegroom. They lack su?cient oil for their lamps
and need to try to ?nd some. Jesus relates:
“While they were going o? to buy it, the bride-

JESUS GIVES THE ILLUSTRATION
OF THE TEN VIRGINS

112

groom came. The virgins who were ready went
in with him to the marriage feast, and the door
was shut. Afterward, the rest of the virgins also
came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’ In answer he
said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’ ”
(Matthew 25:10-12) What a sad outcome for not
remaining prepared and vigilant!
The apostles can see that the bridegroom
whom Jesus mentions refers to himself. Earlier
he had even likened himself to a bridegroom.
(Luke 5:34, 35) And the wise virgins? When
speaking about the “little ?ock,” who would
be given the Kingdom, Jesus used the words:
“Be dressed and ready and have your lamps
burning.” (Luke 12:32, 35) So in this illustration
about the virgins, the apostles can grasp that
Jesus is referring to ones such as themselves.
Hence, what is the message that Jesus is conveying with this illustration?
Jesus does not leave any doubt about that.
He concludes his illustration by saying: “Keep
on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour.”—Matthew 25:13.
Clearly, Jesus is admonishing his faithful followers that in connection with his presence,
they will need to “keep on the watch.” He will be
coming, and they need to be prepared and vigilant—like the ?ve discreet virgins—in order not
to lose sight of their precious hope and miss out
on the reward that can be theirs.

 How do the ?ve discreet virgins di?er from the ?ve foolish ones as respects vigilance and preparedness?
 To whom does the bridegroom refer, and to whom do the virgins refer?
 What message is Jesus conveying with the illustration of the ten virgins?
261

A LESSON IN DILIGENCE—THE TALENTS
MATTHEW 25:14-30

While still with his four apostles on the Mount
of Olives, Jesus tells them another illustration.
A few days earlier, while he was at Jericho, he
gave the illustration of the minas to show that
the Kingdom was yet far o? in the future. The illustration he now relates has a number of similar features. It is part of his answer to the question about his presence and the conclusion of
the system of things. It highlights that his disciples must be diligent with what he entrusts to
them.
Jesus begins: “It is just like a man about to
travel abroad who summoned his slaves and
entrusted his belongings to them.” (Matthew
25:14) Given that Jesus had already likened
himself to a man who traveled abroad “to secure kingly power for himself,” the apostles
could easily see that Jesus is the “man” being
spoken of now.—Luke 19:12.
Before the man in the illustration travels
abroad, he commits to his slaves valuable belongings. During the three and a half years of
his ministry, Jesus focused on preaching the
good news of God’s Kingdom, and he trained
his disciples to do this work. Now he is going
away, con?dent that they will carry on doing
what he trained them to do.—Matthew 10:7;
Luke 10:1, 8, 9; compare John 4:38; 14:12.
In the illustration, how does the man distribute his belongings? Jesus relates: “He gave ?ve
talents to one, two to another, and one to still
another, to each according to his own ability,
and he went abroad.” (Matthew 25:15) What will
these slaves do with what is entrusted to them?
Will they be diligent in using them in their master’s interests? Jesus tells the apostles:
“Immediately the one who received the ?ve
talents went and did business with them and
262

gained ?ve more. Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more. But the slave
who received just one went o? and dug in the
ground and hid his master’s money.” (Matthew
25:16-18) What will happen when the master returns?
“After a long time,” Jesus continues, “the
master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them.” (Matthew 25:19) The ?rst
two did all they could, “each according to his
own ability.” Each slave was diligent, hardworking, and productive with what had been entrusted to him. The one who received ?ve talents doubled that, as did the one who received
two talents. (Back then, a worker would have
to labor about 19 years to earn the equivalent of one talent.) The master has the same
commendation for each of them: “Well done,
good and faithful slave! You were faithful over
a few things. I will appoint you over many

?

things. Enter into the joy of your master.”—Matthew 25:21.
It is di?erent, though, with the slave who received one talent. He says: “Master, I knew you
to be a demanding man, reaping where you did
not sow and gathering where you did not winnow. So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.”
(Matthew 25:24, 25) He has not even deposited
the money with bankers so as to accumulate at
least some pro?t for his master. He has, in effect, worked against his master’s interests.
Fittingly, the master designates him a “wicked and sluggish slave.” What he had is taken away and given to the slave who is willing to apply himself diligently. The master sets
out his standard: “To everyone who has, more
will be given, and he will have an abundance.
But the one who does not have, even what he
has will be taken away from him.”—Matthew
25:26, 29.
Jesus’ disciples have much to think about,
even in connection with this one illustration.
They can see that what Jesus is entrusting to
them—the precious privilege of making disciples—is of great value. And he expects them to
be diligent in using this privilege. Jesus does
not think that they all must do the same in
carrying out the preaching work that he has

JESUS GIVES THE ILLUSTRATION
OF THE TALENTS

113

charged them to do. As illustrated, each should
do all that he can “according to his own ability.” This by no means implies that Jesus will be
pleased if one is “sluggish” and fails to do his
best in promoting the Master’s belongings.
How pleased the apostles must be, though,
with the assurance: “To everyone who has, more
will be given”!

 In the illustration of the talents, who is like the master, and who are like the slaves?
 What lessons does Jesus teach his disciples?

263

CHRIST IN POWER JUDGES THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS
MATTHEW 25:31- 46

On the Mount of Olives, Jesus has just related
the illustrations of the ten virgins and of the talents. How does he end his answer to the apostles’ question regarding the sign of his presence and of the conclusion of the system of
things? He does so with a ?nal illustration, one
about sheep and goats.
Jesus begins by establishing its setting, telling them: “When the Son of man comes in his
glory, and all the angels with him, then he will
sit down on his glorious throne.” (Matthew 25:
31) He leaves no doubt that he, Jesus, is the
central ?gure in this illustration. He often called
himself “the Son of man.”—Matthew 8:20; 9:6;
20:18, 28.
When will this illustration ?nd ful?llment? It
is when Jesus “comes in his glory” with the
angels and sits down “on his glorious throne.”
He had already spoken about “the Son of man
coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory” and with his angels. When
would that be? “Immediately after the tribulation.” (Matthew 24:29-31; Mark 13:26, 27; Luke
21:27) So this illustration is to ?nd ful?llment
at Jesus’ future coming in glory. What will he
then do?
Jesus explains: “When the Son of man comes
. . . , all the nations will be gathered before him,
and he will separate people one from another,
just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the
goats. And he will put the sheep on his right
hand, but the goats on his left.”—Matthew 25:
31-33.
Regarding the sheep, separated to the favored side, Jesus says: “Then the King will say
to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been
blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.’ ”
264

?

(Matthew 25:34) Why do the sheep receive the
King’s favor?
The King explains: “I became hungry and you
gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you
gave me something to drink. I was a stranger
and you received me hospitably; naked and you
clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me.
I was in prison and you visited me.” When these
sheep, “the righteous ones,” ask in what way
they did those good things, he answers: “To the
extent that you did it to one of the least of these
my brothers, you did it to me.” (Matthew 25:35,
36, 40, 46) They do not do these good deeds in
heaven, for there are no sick or hungry ones
there. These must be deeds done for Christ’s
brothers on earth.
What of the goats, who are put on the left
side? Jesus says: “Then [the King] will say to
those on his left: ‘Go away from me, you who
have been cursed, into the everlasting ?re prepared for the Devil and his angels. For I became
hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat; and I
was thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink. I
was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick
and in prison, but you did not look after me.’ ”
(Matthew 25:41-43) This judgment is merited
because the goats failed to treat Christ’s brothers on earth kindly, as they should have done.
The apostles learn that this future time of

JESUS GIVES THE ILLUSTRATION
OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS

114

judgment is to have permanent—everlasting—consequences. Jesus tells them: “Then
[the King] will [say]: ‘Truly I say to you, to the
extent that you did not do it to one of these
least ones, you did not do it to me.’ These will
depart into everlasting cutting-o?, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”—Matthew 25:
45, 46.
Jesus’ response to the apostles’ question
provides much for his followers to think about,
helping them to examine their attitudes and
deeds.

 In Jesus’ illustration of the sheep and the goats, who is “the King,” and when is the illustration
to be ful?lled?
 Why will the sheep be judged as meriting Jesus’ favor?
 On what basis will some people be judged as goats, and what future will the sheep and the goats have?
265

JESUS’ FINAL PASSOVER APPROACHES
MATTHEW 26:1-5, 14-19 MARK 14:1, 2, 10-16 LUKE 22:1-13

Jesus ?nishes teaching the four apostles on
the Mount of Olives, answering their question
about his future presence and the conclusion of
the system of things.
What a busy day Nisan 11 has been! It is perhaps while they are returning to Bethany for the
night when Jesus tells the apostles: “You know
that two days from now the Passover takes
place, and the Son of man will be handed over
to be executed on the stake.”—Matthew 26:2.
Jesus apparently spends the next day,
Wednesday, quietly with his apostles. On Tuesday, he had rebuked the religious leaders and
exposed them publicly. They are seeking to kill
him. Hence, he does not openly show himself on
Nisan 12 so that nothing will prevent his celebrating the Passover with his apostles after
sunset the next evening, as Nisan 14 begins.

But the chief priests and the older men of the
people are not remaining quiet before the Passover. They gather in the courtyard of the high
priest, Caiaphas. Why? They are upset because
Jesus has been exposing them. Now they conspire together “to seize Jesus by cunning and
to kill him.” How and when will they do so? They
say: “Not at the festival, so that there may not
be an uproar among the people.” (Matthew 26:
4, 5) They are in fear because Jesus enjoys the
favor of many.
Meanwhile, the religious leaders receive a visitor. To their surprise, it is one of Jesus’ own
apostles, Judas Iscariot. Satan has implanted
in him the idea of betraying his Master! Judas
asks them: “What will you give me to betray
him to you?” (Matthew 26:15) Delighted at this,
they “agree to give him silver money.” (Luke

?

22:5) How much? They gladly consent to give
him 30 silver pieces. It is signi?cant that the
price of a slave is 30 shekels. (Exodus 21:32)
The religious leaders thus show contempt for
Jesus, that he is of little value. Judas now starts
“looking for a good opportunity to betray him
to them without a crowd around.”—Luke 22:6.
Nisan 13 begins at sundown Wednesday, and
this is the sixth and last night Jesus spends in
Bethany. The next day, ?nal preparations will
need to be made for the Passover. A lamb must
be obtained so that it can be slaughtered and
roasted whole after Nisan 14 begins. Where will
they have the meal, and who will prepare it? Jesus has not provided such details. Thus, Judas
cannot pass them on to the chief priests.
Probably early Thursday afternoon, Jesus
dispatches Peter and John from Bethany, saying: “Go and get the Passover ready for us to
eat.” They respond: “Where do you want us to
get it ready?” Jesus explains: “When you enter into the city, a man carrying an earthenware water jar will meet you. Follow him into the
house that he enters. And say to the landlord
of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you: “Where
is the guest room where I may eat the Passover
with my disciples?” ’ And that man will show
you a large, furnished upper room. Get it ready
there.”—Luke 22:8-12.

? JUDAS ISCARIOT IS PAID TO BETRAY JESUS
TWO APOSTLES PREPARE FOR THE PASSOVER

115

No doubt the landlord is a disciple of Jesus.
He may anticipate Jesus’ request to use his
house for this occasion. When the two apostles
get to Jerusalem, they ?nd everything just as
Jesus had told them. So they see to it that the
lamb is ready and that the other arrangements
for the Passover meal are in place to care for
the needs of the 13—Jesus and his 12 apostles.

 What does Jesus apparently do Wednesday, Nisan 12, and why?
 Why do the religious leaders meet, and why does Judas go to them?
 Whom does Jesus send into Jerusalem on Thursday, and what do they do?
267

TEACHING HUMILITY AT THE LAST PASSOVER
MATTHEW 26:20 MARK 14:17 LUKE 22:14-18 JOHN 13:1-17

At Jesus’ direction, Peter and John have already
arrived in Jerusalem to prepare for the Passover. Later Jesus and the ten other apostles
head there. It is afternoon, and the sun is sinking in the western sky as Jesus and his party
descend the Mount of Olives. This is Jesus’ last
daytime view from here until after his resurrection.
Soon Jesus and his party reach the city and
make their way to the home where they will have
the Passover meal. They climb the stairs to the
large upper room. There they ?nd that all preparations have been made for their private meal.
Jesus has looked forward to this occasion, for
he says: “I have greatly desired to eat this Passover with you before I su?er.”—Luke 22:15.
Many years earlier, the custom of passing a
number of cups of wine among the Passover
participants was introduced. Now, after accepting one of the cups, Jesus gives thanks and
says: “Take this and pass it from one to the other among yourselves, for I tell you, from now on,
I will not drink again from the product of the
vine until the Kingdom of God comes.” (Luke 22:
17, 18) It should be clear that his death is close.
At some point during the Passover meal,
something unusual occurs. Jesus gets up, sets
aside his outer garments, and picks up a towel.
Then he puts water in a basin that is at hand.
Ordinarily, a host would see to it that his guests’
feet were washed, perhaps by a servant. (Luke
7:44) On this occasion no host is present, so Jesus performs this personal service. Any of the
apostles could have taken the opportunity to do
it, but not one of them does. Is it because some
rivalry still exists among them? Whatever the
case, they are embarrassed to have Jesus wash
their feet.
268

When Jesus comes to Peter, he protests: “You
will certainly never wash my feet.” Jesus replies: “Unless I wash you, you have no share
with me.” Peter responds with feeling: “Lord,
wash not only my feet but also my hands and
my head.” How surprised he must be, then, at
Jesus’ answer: “Whoever has bathed does not
need to have more than his feet washed, but is
completely clean. And you men are clean, but
not all of you.”—John 13:8-10.
Jesus washes the feet of all 12, including the
feet of Judas Iscariot. After putting his outer
garments on and reclining at the table again,

?

? JESUS EATS HIS LAST PASSOVER WITH THE APOSTLES
HE TEACHES A LESSON BY WASHING THE APOSTLES’ FEET

Jesus asks: “Do you understand what I have
done to you? You address me as ‘Teacher’ and
‘Lord,’ and you are correct, for I am such. Therefore, if I, the Lord and Teacher, washed your
feet, you also should wash the feet of one another. For I set the pattern for you, that just as
I did to you, you should also do. Most truly I say
to you, a slave is not greater than his master,
nor is one who is sent greater than the one who
sent him. If you know these things, happy you
are if you do them.”—John 13:12-17.
What a beautiful lesson in humble service!
Jesus’ followers should not seek the ?rst place,

116

thinking that they are important and should be
served. Rather, they should follow Jesus’ example, not by any ritual of foot washing, but by being willing to serve with humility and without
partiality.

 During the Passover meal, what does Jesus tell
the apostles that indicates his death is close?
 Why is it unusual that Jesus washes the apostles’
feet?
 By performing the menial service of washing his
apostles’ feet, what lesson is Jesus providing?
269

THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
MATTHEW 26:21-29 MARK 14:18-25 LUKE 22:19-23 JOHN 13:18-30

Earlier this evening Jesus taught his apostles a
lesson in humility by washing their feet. Now,
apparently after the Passover meal, he quotes
David’s prophetic words: “The man at peace
with me, one whom I trusted, who was eating
my bread, has lifted his heel against me.” Then
he explains: “One of you will betray me.”—Psalm
41:9; John 13:18, 21.
The apostles look at one another, and each
asks: “Lord, it is not I, is it?” Even Judas Iscariot does so. Peter urges John, who is next to Jesus at the table, to ?nd out who it is. So John
leans close to Jesus and asks: “Lord, who is it?”
—Matthew 26:22; John 13:25.
Jesus answers: “It is the one to whom I will
give the piece of bread that I dip.” Dipping some
bread in a dish on the table, Jesus hands it to
Judas, saying: “The Son of man is going away,

270

just as it is written about him, but woe to that
man through whom the Son of man is betrayed!
It would have been better for that man if he had
not been born.” (John 13:26; Matthew 26:24)
Satan then enters Judas. This man, already corrupt, now gives himself over to do the Devil’s
will and thus becomes “the son of destruction.”
—John 6:64, 70; 12:4; 17:12.
Jesus tells Judas: “What you are doing, do it
more quickly.” The other apostles imagine that
Judas, who is holding the money box, is being
told: “ ‘Buy what we need for the festival,’ or that
he should give something to the poor.” (John 13:
27-30) Instead, Judas goes o? to betray Jesus.
On this same evening as the Passover meal,
Jesus introduces an entirely new type of meal.
He takes a loaf, says a prayer of thanks, breaks
it, and gives it to his apostles to eat. He says:

?

“This means my body, which is to be given in
your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of
me.” (Luke 22:19) The piece of bread is passed
around, and the apostles eat of it.
Now Jesus takes a cup of wine, says a prayer
of thanks over it, and passes it to them. Each
drinks from the cup, about which Jesus says:
“This cup means the new covenant by virtue of
my blood, which is to be poured out in your behalf.”—Luke 22:20.
Thus Jesus arranges for a memorial of his
death that his followers are to hold each year

? JUDAS IS IDENTIFIED AS A TRAITOR
JESUS INSTITUTES A MEMORIAL MEAL

117

on Nisan 14. It will call to mind what Jesus and
his Father have done to enable men of faith
to escape from the condemnation of sin and
death. Even more so than did the Passover for
the Jews, it highlights true liberation for believing mankind.
Jesus says that his blood “is to be poured
out in behalf of many for forgiveness of sins.”
Among the many to gain such forgiveness are
his faithful apostles and others like them. They
are the ones who will be with him in the Kingdom of his Father.—Matthew 26:28, 29.

 What Bible prophecy does Jesus quote about a companion, and how does he apply it?
 Jesus tells Judas to do what, but how do the other apostles understand Jesus’ direction?
 What new event does Jesus introduce, and what purpose does it serve?

A DISPUTE OVER GREATNESS
MATTHEW 26:31-35 MARK 14:27-31 LUKE 22:24-38 JOHN 13:31-38

During his last evening with his apostles, Jesus
has provided them with a ?ne lesson in humble
service by washing their feet. Why is that ?tting? Because of a weakness they have shown.
They are devoted to God, yet they still are concerned about which of them is greatest. (Mark
9:33, 34; 10:35-37) That weakness resurfaces
this evening.
The apostles become involved in “a heated
dispute among them over which one of them
was considered to be the greatest.” (Luke 22:
24) How saddened Jesus must be to see them
bickering again! What does he do?
Rather than scolding the apostles for their
attitude and behavior, Jesus patiently reasons
with them: “The kings of the nations lord it over
them, and those having authority over them
are called Benefactors. You, though, are not to
be that way. . . . For which one is greater, the
one dining or the one serving?” Then, reminding them of the example that he has constantly
set for them, Jesus says: “But I am among you
as the one serving.”—Luke 22:25-27.
Despite their imperfections, the apostles
have stuck with Jesus through many challenging situations. So he says: “I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a
covenant with me, for a kingdom.” (Luke 22:
29) These men are Jesus’ loyal followers.
He assures them that by means of a covenant
between him and them, they will be in the Kingdom and share in his royal dominion.
Although the apostles have this marvelous
prospect, they are still in the ?esh and are
still imperfect. Jesus tells them: “Satan has demanded to have all of you to sift you as wheat,”
which scatters as it is sifted. (Luke 22:31) He
also warns: “All of you will be stumbled in con272

nection with me on this night, for it is written:
‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the
?ock will be scattered about.’ ”—Matthew 26:
31; Zechariah 13:7.
Peter con?dently objects: “Although all the
others are stumbled in connection with you,
I will never be stumbled!” (Matthew 26:33) Jesus tells Peter that before a rooster crows twice
that night, Peter will disown him. However, Jesus adds: “I have made supplication for you
that your faith may not give out; and you, once
you have returned, strengthen your brothers.”
(Luke 22:32) Yet Peter boldly a?rms: “Even if I
should have to die with you, I will by no means
disown you.” (Matthew 26:35) The other apostles say the same thing.
Jesus tells his disciples: “I am with you a little longer. You will look for me; and just as I said
to the Jews, ‘Where I go you cannot come,’ I now
say it also to you.” Then he adds: “I am giving
you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one
another. By this all will know that you are my
disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”
—John 13:33-35.
At hearing Jesus say that he is to be with
them just a little longer, Peter asks: “Lord,
where are you going?” Jesus replies: “Where I
am going, you cannot follow me now, but you
will follow later.” Puzzled, Peter says: “Lord, why
is it I cannot follow you now? I will surrender my
life in your behalf.”—John 13:36, 37.
Jesus now refers to the time when he sent the
apostles out on a preaching tour of Galilee without a money bag or a food pouch. (Matthew 10:
5, 9, 10) He asks: “You did not lack anything, did
you?” They reply: “No!” But what should they do
in the days ahead? Jesus directs them: “Let the

?

one who has a money bag take it, likewise a
food pouch, and let the one who has no sword
sell his outer garment and buy one. For I tell you
that what is written must be accomplished in
me, namely, ‘He was counted with lawless ones.’
For this is being ful?lled concerning me.”—Luke
22:35-37.
Jesus is pointing to the time when he will be

JESUS GIVES COUNSEL ABOUT POSITION
? PETER’S DENIAL FORETOLD
? LOVE IDENTIFIES JESUS’ FOLLOWERS

118

nailed to a stake alongside evildoers, or lawless
ones. Thereafter his followers will face severe
persecution. They feel that they are prepared
and say: “Lord, look! here are two swords.” He
answers: “It is enough.” (Luke 22:38) That they
have two swords with them will soon a?ord Jesus an opportunity to teach another important
lesson.

 Why are the apostles arguing, and how does Jesus deal with the situation?
 What is to be accomplished by the covenant that Jesus makes with his faithful disciples?
 How does Jesus respond to Peter’s display of con?dence?
273

JESUS—THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE
JOHN 14:1-31

Still in the upper room with the apostles after the memorial meal, Jesus encourages them:
“Do not let your hearts be troubled. Exercise
faith in God; exercise faith also in me.”—John
13:36; 14:1.
Jesus gives the faithful apostles reason not
to be troubled over his departure: “In the
house of my Father are many dwelling places.
. . . If I go my way and prepare a place for you,
I will come again and will receive you home to
myself, so that where I am you also may be.”
The apostles, however, do not grasp that he
is speaking about going to heaven. Thomas
asks: “Lord, we do not know where you are
going. How can we know the way?”—John 14:
2-5.
“I am the way and the truth and the life,” Jesus answers. Only by accepting him and his
teachings and imitating his life course can one
enter the heavenly house of his Father. Je-

sus says: “No one comes to the Father except
through me.”—John 14:6.
Philip, listening intently, requests: “Lord,
show us the Father, and it is enough for
us.” Philip seems to want some manifestation of God, like the visions that Moses, Elijah, and Isaiah received. However, the apostles have something better than such visions.
Jesus highlights that, replying: “Even after I
have been with you men for such a long time,
Philip, have you not come to know me? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also.”
Jesus perfectly re?ects the Father’s personality; hence, living with and observing Jesus is
like seeing the Father. Of course, the Father is
superior to the Son, for Jesus points out: “The
things I say to you I do not speak of my own
originality.” (John 14:8-10) The apostles can
see that Jesus is giving all credit for his teachings to his Father.

?

Jesus’ apostles have seen him do wonderful
works and have heard him proclaim the good
news about the Kingdom of God. Now he tells
them: “Whoever exercises faith in me will also
do the works that I do; and he will do works
greater than these.” (John 14:12) Jesus is not
saying that they will perform greater miracles
than he did. They will, though, carry out their
ministry for a much longer time, over a much
greater area, and to far more people.
Jesus’ departure will not leave them abandoned, for he promises: “If you ask anything in
my name, I will do it.” Moreover, he says: “I will
ask the Father and he will give you another helper to be with you forever, the spirit of the truth.”
(John 14:14, 16, 17) He guarantees them that
they will receive the holy spirit, this other helper. That happens on the day of Pentecost.
“In a little while,” Jesus says, “the world will
see me no more, but you will see me, because I
live and you will live.” (John 14:19) Not only will
Jesus appear to them in bodily form after his
resurrection but he will, in time, resurrect them
to be with him in heaven as spirit creatures.
Now Jesus states a simple truth: “Whoever
has my commandments and observes them is
the one who loves me. In turn, whoever loves me
will be loved by my Father, and I will love him
and will clearly show myself to him.” At this the
apostle Judas, who is also called Thaddaeus,
asks: “Lord, what has happened that you intend

JESUS IS GOING AWAY TO PREPARE A PLACE
? HE PROMISES HIS FOLLOWERS A HELPER
? THE FATHER IS GREATER THAN JESUS

119

to show yourself clearly to us and not to the
world?” Jesus replies: “If anyone loves me, he
will observe my word, and my Father will love
him . . . Whoever does not love me does not observe my words.” (John 14:21-24) Unlike his followers, the world does not recognize Jesus as
the way, the truth, and the life.
Jesus is going away, so how will his disciples
be able to recall all that he taught them? Jesus
explains: “The helper, the holy spirit, which the
Father will send in my name, that one will teach
you all things and bring back to your minds all
the things I told you.” The apostles have seen
how powerfully the holy spirit can work, so this
assurance is comforting. Jesus adds: “I leave
you peace; I give you my peace. . . . Do not
let your hearts be troubled nor let them shrink
out of fear.” (John 14:26, 27) The disciples have
reason, then, not to be troubled—they will have
direction and protection from Jesus’ Father.
Evidence of God’s protection will soon be
seen. Jesus says: “The ruler of the world is coming, and he has no hold on me.” (John 14:30)
The Devil was able to enter into Judas and get
a hold on him. But there is no sinful weakness in
Jesus that Satan can play on to turn him against
God. Nor will the Devil be able to restrain Jesus
in death. Why not? Jesus states: “I am doing just
as the Father has commanded me to do.” He is
certain that his Father will resurrect him.—John
14:31.

 Where is Jesus going, and what assurance does Thomas receive regarding the way there?
 What does Philip apparently want Jesus to provide?
 How will Jesus’ followers do greater works than he is doing?
 Why is it reassuring that the Father is greater than Jesus?
275

BEARING FRUIT AS BRANCHES AND BEING JESUS’ FRIENDS
JOHN 15:1-27

Jesus has been encouraging his faithful apostles in a heart-to-heart talk. It is late, perhaps
past midnight. Jesus now presents a motivating illustration:
“I am the true vine, and my Father is the cultivator,” he begins. (John 15:1) His illustration
resembles what had been said centuries earlier about the nation of Israel, which was called
Jehovah’s vine. (Jeremiah 2:21; Hosea 10:1, 2)
However, Jehovah is casting o? that nation.
(Matthew 23:37, 38) So Jesus is introducing a
new thought. He is the vine that his Father has
been cultivating since anointing Jesus with holy
spirit in 29 C.E. But Jesus shows that the vine
symbolizes more than just him, saying:
“[My Father] takes away every branch in me
not bearing fruit, and he cleans every one bearing fruit, so that it may bear more fruit. . . . Just
as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless
it remains in the vine, neither can you unless
you remain in union with me. I am the vine; you
are the branches.”—John 15:2-5.
Jesus has promised his faithful disciples that
after he goes away, he would send a helper,
the holy spirit. Fifty-one days later, when the
apostles and others receive that spirit, they become branches of the vine. And all the “branches” would have to remain united with Jesus. To
accomplish what?
He explains: “Whoever remains in union with
me and I in union with him, this one bears
much fruit; for apart from me you can do nothing at all.” These “branches”—his faithful followers—would bear much fruit, imitating Jesus’ qualities, actively speaking to others about
God’s Kingdom, and making more disciples.
What if one does not remain in union with Jesus and does not bear fruit? Jesus explains: “If
276

anyone does not remain in union with me, he is
thrown out.” On the other hand, Jesus says: “If
you remain in union with me and my sayings remain in you, ask whatever you wish and it will
take place for you.”—John 15:5-7.
Now Jesus returns to what he has mentioned
twice—keeping his commandments. (John 14:
15, 21) He describes a key way for disciples to
prove that they are doing so: “If you observe my
commandments, you will remain in my love, just
as I have observed the commandments of the
Father and remain in his love.” However, more is
involved than loving Jehovah God and his Son.
Jesus says: “This is my commandment, that you
love one another just as I have loved you. No
one has love greater than this, that someone
should surrender his life in behalf of his friends.
You are my friends if you do what I am commanding you.”—John 15:10-14.
In a few hours, Jesus will demonstrate his
love by giving his life for all who exercise faith
in him. His example should move his followers
to have similar self-sacri?cing love for one another. This love will identify them, as Jesus stated earlier: “By this all will know that you are my
disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”
—John 13:35.
The apostles should take note of Jesus’ calling them “friends.” He relates why they are
such: “I have called you friends, because I have
made known to you all the things I have heard
from my Father.” What a precious relationship
to have—to be intimate friends of Jesus and to
know what the Father told him! In order to enjoy this relationship, though, they must “keep
bearing fruit.” If they do, Jesus says, “no matter what you ask the Father in my name he [will]
give it to you.”—John 15:15, 16.

?

The love among these “branches,” his disciples, will help them to endure what is to come.
He warns them that the world will hate them, yet
he o?ers this comfort: “If the world hates you,
you know that it has hated me before it hated
you. If you were part of the world, the world
would be fond of what is its own. Now because
you are no part of the world, . . . for this reason
the world hates you.”—John 15:18, 19.
Explaining further why the world will hate
them, Jesus adds: “They will do all these things
against you on account of my name, because
they do not know the One who sent me.” Jesus says that his miraculous works, in e?ect,
convict those who hate him: “If I had not done
among them the works that no one else did,
they would have no sin; but now they have both
seen me and hated me as well as my Father.”
Actually, their hatred ful?lls prophecy.—John
15:21, 24, 25; Psalm 35:19; 69:4.
Again, Jesus promises to send the helper, the
holy spirit. That powerful force is available for
all his followers and is able to help them to bear
fruit, “to bear witness.”—John 15:27.

 Who is the cultivator, who is the vine, and who
are the branches in Jesus’ illustration?
 What fruit does God desire from the branches?
 How can Jesus’ disciples be his friends,
and what will help them to face up to the
world’s hatred?

THE TRUE VINE AND THE BRANCHES
? HOW TO REMAIN IN JESUS’ LOVE

120

“TAKE COURAGE! I HAVE CONQUERED THE WORLD”
JOHN 16:1-33

Jesus and the apostles are poised to leave the
upper room where they held the Passover meal.
Having given them considerable admonition,
Jesus adds: “I have said these things to you so
that you may not be stumbled.” Why was such
a warning appropriate? He tells them: “Men will
expel you from the synagogue. In fact, the hour
is coming when everyone who kills you will think
he has o?ered a sacred service to God.”—John
16:1, 2.
That may be troubling news for the apostles.
Although Jesus had said earlier that the world
would hate them, he had not directly told them
that they would be killed. Why not? “I did not tell
you these things at ?rst, because I was with
you,” he says. (John 16:4) Now he is forearming them before he departs. This may help them
to avoid being stumbled later.
Jesus continues: “I am going to the One who
sent me; yet not one of you asks me, ‘Where are
you going?’ ” Earlier that evening they had inquired about where he was going. (John 13:36;
14:5; 16:5) But now, shaken by what he said
about persecution, they are absorbed in their
own grief. Thus they fail to ask further about the
glory that awaits him or what that would mean
for true worshippers. Jesus observes: “Because
I have told you these things, grief has ?lled your
hearts.”—John 16:6.
Then Jesus explains: “It is for your bene?t
that I am going away. For if I do not go away,
the helper will not come to you; but if I do go, I
will send him to you.” (John 16:7) Only by Jesus’ dying and going to heaven can his disciples
receive the holy spirit, which he can send as a
helper to his people anywhere on earth.
The holy spirit “will give the world convincing
evidence concerning sin and concerning righ278

teousness and concerning judgment.” (John
16:8) Yes, the world’s failure to exercise faith in
God’s Son will be exposed. Jesus’ ascension to
heaven will provide convincing evidence of his
righteousness and will demonstrate why Satan,
“the ruler of this world,” merits adverse judgment.—John 16:11.
“I still have many things to say to you,” Jesus continues, “but you are not able to bear
them now.” When he pours out the holy spirit, it
will guide them to an understanding of “all the
truth,” and they will be able to live by that truth.
—John 16:12, 13.
The apostles are puzzled by Jesus’ further
statement: “In a little while you will see me
no longer, and again, in a little while you will
see me.” They ask one another what he means.
Jesus realizes that they want to question him
about this, so he explains: “Most truly I say to
you, you will weep and wail, but the world will
rejoice; you will be grieved, but your grief will
be turned into joy.” (John 16:16, 20) When Jesus is killed the next afternoon, the religious
leaders rejoice, but the disciples grieve. Then
their grief changes into joy when Jesus is resurrected! And their joy continues when he pours
out upon them God’s holy spirit.
Comparing the apostles’ situation to that of a
woman during birth pangs, Jesus says: “When
a woman is giving birth, she has grief because
her hour has come, but when she has given
birth to the child, she remembers the tribulation no more because of the joy that a man has
been born into the world.” Jesus encourages his
apostles, saying: “You also, now you have grief;
but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.”—John
16:21, 22.

?

Up to this time, the apostles have never made
requests in Jesus’ name. He now says: “In that
day you will make request of the Father in my
name.” Why are they to do so? Not because the
Father is reluctant to respond. In fact, Jesus
says: “The Father himself has a?ection for you,
because you have had a?ection for me . . . as
God’s representative.”—John 16:26, 27.
Jesus’ encouraging words to the apostles may
have emboldened them to a?rm: “By this we
believe that you came from God.” That conviction will soon be tested. In fact, Jesus describes

SOON THE APOSTLES WILL SEE JESUS NO MORE
? THE APOSTLES’ GRIEF WILL TURN INTO JOY

121

what is just ahead: “Look! The hour is coming,
indeed, it has come, when each one of you will
be scattered to his own house and you will leave
me alone.” Yet he assures them: “I have said
these things to you so that by means of me you
may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation, but take courage! I have conquered the
world.” (John 16:30-33) No, Jesus is not abandoning them. He is sure that they too can be
world conquerors, just as he is, by their faithfully accomplishing God’s will despite the attempts
of Satan and his world to break their integrity.

 The apostles are troubled when Jesus gives what warning?
 Why do the apostles fail to ask Jesus any further questions?
 How does Jesus illustrate the apostles’ change from grief to joy?
279

JESUS’ CONCLUDING PRAYER IN THE UPPER ROOM
JOHN 17:1-26

Moved by deep love for his apostles, Jesus has
been preparing them for his imminent departure. He now raises his eyes to heaven and
prays to his Father: “Glorify your son so that
your son may glorify you, just as you have given him authority over all ?esh, so that he may
give everlasting life to all those whom you have
given to him.”—John 17:1, 2.
Clearly, Jesus recognizes that giving God glory is of prime importance. But how comforting is the prospect that Jesus mentions—everlasting life! Having received “authority over all
?esh,” Jesus can o?er the bene?ts of his ransom to all mankind. Yet, only some will be so
blessed. Why only some? Because Jesus will impart the bene?ts of his ransom only to those
who act in accord with what Jesus next mentions: “This means everlasting life, their coming
to know you, the only true God, and the one
whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
A person must come to know both the Father and the Son intimately, having a close bond
with them. He must feel as they do about matters. Further, he must strive to imitate their
matchless qualities in dealing with others. And
he must appreciate that humans’ receiving
everlasting life is secondary to the glori?cation
of God. Jesus now returns to this theme:
“I have glori?ed you on the earth, having ?nished the work you have given me to do. So
now, Father, glorify me at your side with the
glory that I had alongside you before the world
was.” (John 17:4, 5) Yes, Jesus asks to be restored to heavenly glory by means of a resurrection.
However, Jesus has not forgotten what he has
accomplished in his ministry. He prays: “I have
made your name manifest to the men whom you
280

gave me out of the world. They were yours, and
you gave them to me, and they have observed
your word.” (John 17:6) Jesus did more than
pronounce God’s name, Jehovah, in his ministry. He helped his apostles to come to know
what the name represents—God’s qualities and
his way of dealing with humans.
The apostles have come to know Jehovah, the
role of his Son, and the things Jesus has taught.
Jesus humbly says: “I have given them the sayings that you gave me, and they have accepted
them and have certainly come to know that I
came as your representative, and they have believed that you sent me.”—John 17:8.
Jesus then acknowledges the distinction between his followers and the world of mankind
in general: “I make request, not concerning the
world, but concerning those whom you have
given me, because they are yours . . . Holy Father, watch over them on account of your own
name, which you have given me, so that they
may be one just as we are one. . . . I have protected them, and not one of them is destroyed
except the son of destruction,” namely, Judas
Iscariot, who is on his mission to betray Jesus.
—John 17:9-12.
“The world has hated them,” Jesus continues
to pray. “I do not request that you take them out
of the world, but that you watch over them because of the wicked one. They are no part of the
world, just as I am no part of the world.” (John
17:14-16) The apostles and other disciples are
in the world, human society ruled by Satan, but
they must remain separate from it and its badness. How?
They must keep themselves holy, set apart
to serve God, by applying the truths found in
the Hebrew Scriptures and the truths that Jesus

?

? THE RESULT OF COMING TO KNOW GOD AND HIS SON
THE ONENESS OF JEHOVAH, JESUS, AND THE DISCIPLES

himself has taught. Jesus prays: “Sanctify them
by means of the truth; your word is truth.” (John
17:17) In time, some of the apostles will write inspired books that will also be part of “the truth”
that can help to sanctify a person.
But there will in time be others who will accept “the truth.” Jesus thus prays “not concerning these only [those who are there], but
also concerning those putting faith in [him]
through their word.” What does Jesus request
for all of them? “That they may all be one, just
as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in
union with you, that they also may be in union
with us.” (John 17:20, 21) Jesus and his Father
are not literally one person. They are one in
that they are in agreement on all things. Jesus
prays that his followers enjoy this same oneness.
Shortly before this, Jesus had told Peter
and the others that he was going his way to
prepare a place for them, meaning a place
in heaven. (John 14:2, 3) Jesus now returns
to that idea in prayer: “Father, I want those
whom you have given me to be with me where
I am, in order that they may look upon my glory that you have given me, because you loved
me before the founding of the world.” (John
17:24) He thus con?rms that long ago—before Adam and Eve conceived o?spring—God
loved his only-begotten Son, who became Jesus Christ.
Concluding his prayer, Jesus reemphasizes
both his Father’s name and God’s love for the
apostles and for others who will yet accept “the
truth,” saying: “I have made your name known
to them and will make it known, so that the love
with which you loved me may be in them and I
in union with them.”—John 17:26.

122

 What does coming to know God and his Son
mean?
 In what ways has Jesus made God’s name
manifest?
 How are God, his Son, and all true worshippers
one?
281

PRAYING WHEN DEEPLY GRIEVED
MATTHEW 26:30, 36- 46 MARK 14:26, 32- 42 LUKE 22:39- 46 JOHN 18:1

Jesus ?nishes praying with his faithful apostles. Then, ‘after singing praises, they go out
to the Mount of Olives.’ (Mark 14:26) They
head eastward to a garden called Gethsemane,
where Jesus is accustomed to going.
Once they arrive at this pleasant spot among
the olive trees, Jesus leaves eight of the apostles behind. Perhaps they remain near the garden’s entrance, for he tells them: “Sit down
here while I go over there and pray.” Taking
along three apostles—Peter, James, and John—
Jesus goes farther into the garden. He becomes
greatly troubled and tells the three: “I am deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on
the watch with me.”—Matthew 26:36-38.
Going some distance away from them, Jesus
‘falls to the ground and begins praying.’ What
is he praying to God about at this intense moment? He prays: “Father, all things are possible
for you; remove this cup from me. Yet, not what
I want, but what you want.” (Mark 14:35, 36)
What does he mean? Is he backing away from
his role as Ransomer? No!
Jesus has observed from heaven the extreme
su?ering of others put to death by the Romans.
Now as a human, who has tender feelings and
who can feel pain, Jesus is not looking forward
to what awaits him. More important, though, he
is in agony because he senses that his dying like
a despicable criminal might bring reproach on
his Father’s name. In a few hours, he will be
hanged on a stake as if he were a blasphemer
against God.
After praying at length, Jesus returns and
?nds the three apostles sleeping. He says to
Peter: “Could you not so much as keep on the
watch for one hour with me? Keep on the watch
and pray continually, so that you may not enter
282

into temptation.” Jesus realizes that the apostles too have been under stress, and it is late.
He adds: “The spirit, of course, is eager, but the
?esh is weak.”—Matthew 26:40, 41.
Then Jesus goes o? a second time and asks
that God remove from him “this cup.” On returning, he once again ?nds the three apostles asleep, when they should have been praying that they not enter into temptation. When
Jesus speaks to them, they do “not know what
to answer him.” (Mark 14:40) A third time Jesus goes o?, and he bends down on his knees
to pray.
Jesus is deeply concerned about the reproach that his death as a criminal will bring on
his Father’s name. Jehovah is hearing his Son’s
prayers, though, and at one point God sends an
angel to strengthen him. Even so, Jesus does
not stop supplicating his Father, but he keeps
“praying more earnestly.” The emotional stress
is enormous. What a weight is on Jesus’ shoulders! His own eternal life and that of believing

HIS SWEAT IS AS DROPS OF BLOOD

Physician Luke does not explain how
Jesus’ sweat “became as drops of
blood.” (Luke 22:44) Luke may have
been speaking illustratively, that the
sweat resembled blood dripping from
a wound. An alternate idea was offered by Dr. William D. Edwards in
The Journal of the American Medical
Association (JAMA): “Although this is
a very rare phenomenon, bloody sweat
(hematidrosis . . . ) may occur in highly emotional states . . . As a result of
hemorrhage into the sweat glands,
the skin becomes fragile and tender.”

?

humans is at stake. In fact, his ‘sweat becomes
as drops of blood falling to the ground.’—Luke
22:44.
When Jesus returns the third time to his
apostles, he again ?nds them sleeping. “At such

JESUS IN THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE
? HIS SWEAT IS AS DROPS OF BLOOD

123

a time as this,” he says, “you are sleeping and
resting! Look! The hour has drawn near for the
Son of man to be betrayed into the hands of sinners. Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer has
drawn near.”—Matthew 26:45, 46.

 After leaving the upper room, where does Jesus lead the apostles?
 What are three apostles doing while Jesus prays?
 That Jesus’ sweat becomes as drops of blood indicates what about his feelings?
283

CHRIST IS BETRAYED AND ARRESTED
MATTHEW 26:47-56 MARK 14:43-52 LUKE 22:47-53 JOHN 18:2-12

It is well past midnight. The priests have agreed
to pay Judas 30 pieces of silver to betray Jesus.
So Judas leads a large crowd of chief priests
and Pharisees, seeking to ?nd Jesus. They are
accompanied by a detachment of armed Roman
soldiers with a military commander.
Evidently, when Jesus dismissed him from
the Passover meal, Judas went directly to the
chief priests. (John 13:27) They assembled
their own o?cers as well as a band of soldiers.
Judas may have led them ?rst to the room
where Jesus and his apostles had celebrated
the Passover. But now the mob has crossed the
Kidron Valley and is headed for the garden. In
addition to weapons, they are carrying lamps
and torches, determined to ?nd Jesus.
As Judas leads the procession up the Mount
of Olives, he feels sure that he knows where to
?nd Jesus. During the past week, as Jesus and
the apostles traveled back and forth between
Bethany and Jerusalem, they often stopped in
the garden of Gethsemane. But now it is night,
and Jesus may be in the shadows of the olive
trees in the garden. So how will the soldiers,
who may not have seen Jesus before, be able
to identify him? To help them, Judas will provide a sign. He says: “Whoever it is I kiss, he is
the one; take him into custody, and lead him
away under guard.”—Mark 14:44.
Leading the crowd into the garden, Judas
sees Jesus with his apostles and goes straight
up to him. “Greetings, Rabbi!” Judas says, and
he kisses Jesus very tenderly. “Fellow, for what
purpose are you present?” Jesus responds.
(Matthew 26:49, 50) Answering his own question, Jesus says: “Judas, are you betraying the
Son of man with a kiss?” (Luke 22:48) But that
is enough of his betrayer!
284

Jesus now steps into the light of the torches
and lamps and asks: “Whom are you looking
for?” From the mob comes the answer: “Jesus
the Nazarene.” Jesus courageously says: “I am
he.” (John 18:4, 5) Not knowing what to expect,
the men fall to the ground.
Rather than seizing that moment to ?ee into
the night, Jesus again asks whom they are
seeking. When they again say, “Jesus the Nazarene,” he calmly continues: “I told you that I am
he. So if you are looking for me, let these men
go.” Even at this crucial moment, Jesus recalls
what he said earlier, that he would not lose a
single one. (John 6:39; 17:12) Jesus has kept
his faithful apostles and not one has been lost
“except the son of destruction”—Judas. (John
18:7-9) Thus he now asks that his loyal followers be let go.
As the soldiers stand and move toward Jesus, the apostles realize what is happening.
“Lord, should we strike with the sword?” they
ask. (Luke 22:49) Before Jesus can reply, Peter
wields one of the two swords that the apostles
have at hand. He attacks Malchus, a slave of the
high priest, cutting o? his right ear.
Jesus touches the ear of Malchus, healing the
wound. He then teaches an important lesson,
commanding Peter: “Return your sword to its
place, for all those who take up the sword will
perish by the sword.” Jesus is willing to be arrested, for he explains: “How would the Scriptures be ful?lled that say it must take place this
way?” (Matthew 26:52, 54) He adds: “Should I
not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”
(John 18:11) Jesus agrees with God’s will for
him, even to the point of dying.
Jesus asks the crowd: “Did you come out to
arrest me with swords and clubs as against a

?

robber? Day after day I used to sit in the temple teaching, and yet you did not take me into
custody. But all of this has taken place for the
writings of the prophets to be ful?lled.”—Matthew 26:55, 56.
The soldier band, the military commander,
and the o?cers of the Jews seize Jesus and

JUDAS BETRAYS JESUS IN THE GARDEN
? PETER CUTS OFF A MAN’S EAR
? JESUS IS ARRESTED

124

bind him. Seeing this, the apostles ?ee. However, “a certain young man”—perhaps the disciple Mark—remains among the crowd so as to
follow Jesus. (Mark 14:51) This young man is
recognized, and the crowd attempts to seize
him, which forces him to leave behind his linen
garment as he gets away.

 Why does Judas look for Jesus in the garden of Gethsemane?
 Trying to defend Jesus, what does Peter do, but what does Jesus say about this?
 How does Jesus reveal that he is in agreement with God’s will for him?
 When the apostles abandon Jesus, who remains, and what happens then?
285

JESUS IS TAKEN TO ANNAS, THEN TO CAIAPHAS
MATTHEW 26:57-68 MARK 14:53-65 LUKE 22:54, 63-65 JOHN 18:13, 14, 19-24

Once Jesus is bound like a common criminal, he
is led to Annas, who was the high priest when
young Jesus amazed the teachers at the temple. (Luke 2:42, 47) Some of Annas’ sons later
served as high priest, and now his son-in-law
Caiaphas holds that position.
While Jesus is at the home of Annas, Caiaphas has time to assemble the Sanhedrin. That
court of 71 members includes the high priest
and others who had held that o?ce.
Annas questions Jesus “about his disciples
and about his teaching.” Jesus replies simply:
“I have spoken to the world publicly. I always
taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where

all the Jews come together, and I said nothing
in secret. Why do you question me? Question
those who have heard what I told them.”—John
18:19-21.
An o?cer standing there slaps Jesus in the
face and says reprovingly: “Is that the way
you answer the chief priest?” But Jesus, knowing that he has done no wrong, responds: “If I
said something wrong, bear witness about the
wrong; but if what I said was right, why do you
hit me?” (John 18:22, 23) Annas then has Jesus
taken away to his son-in-law Caiaphas.
By now those composing the whole Sanhedrin—the current high priest, the elders of the

?

JESUS IS TAKEN TO FORMER HIGH PRIEST ANNAS
? AN ILLEGAL TRIAL BY THE SANHEDRIN

people, and the scribes—have assembled. They
meet at the home of Caiaphas. It is illegal to
hold such a trial on the night of Passover, but
this does not deter them from pursuing their
wicked purpose.
This is hardly an unbiased group. After Jesus resurrected Lazarus, the Sanhedrin decided
that Jesus should die. (John 11:47-53) And just
days ago the religious authorities conspired to
seize Jesus and kill him. (Matthew 26:3, 4) Yes,
even before his trial begins, Jesus is as good as
condemned to death!
In addition to meeting illegally, the chief
priests and others of the Sanhedrin are attempting to ?nd witnesses who will give false
evidence to build the case against Jesus. They
?nd many, but these cannot agree as to their
testimony. Finally, two come forward and claim:
“We heard him say, ‘I will throw down this temple that was made with hands, and in three
days I will build another not made with hands.’ ”
(Mark 14:58) Yet even these men do not fully
agree.
Caiaphas asks Jesus: “Do you say nothing
in reply? What is it these men are testifying
against you?” (Mark 14:60) Jesus remains silent in the face of this false charge made by witnesses whose stories disagree. So High Priest
Caiaphas switches to a di?erent tactic.
Caiaphas knows that the Jews are sensi-

125

tive about anyone claiming to be the Son of
God. Earlier, when Jesus had called God his Father, the Jews wanted to kill him because they
claimed that he was “making himself equal to
God.” (John 5:17, 18; 10:31-39) Aware of such
sentiments, Caiaphas now craftily demands of
Jesus: “I put you under oath by the living God
to tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of
God!” (Matthew 26:63) Of course, Jesus has acknowledged being the Son of God. (John 3:18;
5:25; 11:4) If he does not do so now, that could
be construed as denying that he is God’s Son
and the Christ. So Jesus says: “I am; and you
will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand
of power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”—Mark 14:62.
At this, Caiaphas with great drama rips his
garments and exclaims: “He has blasphemed!
What further need do we have of witnesses?
See! Now you have heard the blasphemy. What
is your opinion?” The Sanhedrin hand down the
unjust judgment: “He deserves to die.”—Matthew 26:65, 66.
Then they begin to mock Jesus and hit him
with their ?sts. Others slap his face and spit
into it. After they cover his whole face and slap
him, they say sarcastically: “Prophesy! Who is
it that struck you?” (Luke 22:64) Here is the
Son of God being treated abusively at an illegal
nighttime trial!

 Where is Jesus led ?rst, and what happens to him there?
 Where is Jesus next taken, and how is Caiaphas able to get the Sanhedrin to proclaim that Jesus
deserves to die?
 What abusive behavior occurs during the trial?
287

DENIALS AT THE HOUSE OF CAIAPHAS
MATTHEW 26:69-75 MARK 14:66-72 LUKE 22:54-62 JOHN 18:15-18, 25-27

Upon Jesus’ being arrested in the garden
of Gethsemane, the apostles abandon him,
?eeing in fear. However, two of them stop their
?ight. They are Peter “as well as another disciple,” evidently the apostle John. (John 18:15;
19:35; 21:24) They may catch up with Jesus as
he is taken to the home of Annas. When Annas
sends Jesus to High Priest Caiaphas, Peter and
John follow at a distance. They are likely torn
between fear for their own lives and concern for
what will happen to their Master.
John is known to the high priest and is thus
able to gain entrance into the courtyard at Caiaphas’ house. Peter remains outside at the door
until John returns and speaks to a servant girl
who is acting as doorkeeper. Then Peter is allowed to enter.
It is cold this night, so those in the courtyard
have a charcoal ?re burning. Peter sits with
them to keep warm as he waits “to see the outcome” of Jesus’ trial. (Matthew 26:58) Now, in
the light of the ?re, the doorkeeper who let Peter in gets a better look at him. “You are not
also one of this man’s disciples, are you?” she
demands. (John 18:17) And she is not alone
in recognizing Peter and accusing him of being with Jesus.—Matthew 26:69, 71-73; Mark
14:70.
This greatly upsets Peter. He is trying to be
inconspicuous, even withdrawing to the entryway. So Peter denies that he was with Jesus, at
one point saying: “Neither do I know him nor do
I understand what you are talking about.” (Mark
14:67, 68) He also starts to “curse and swear,”
meaning that he is willing to take an oath that

288

his words are true and to face calamity if they
are not.—Matthew 26:74.
Meanwhile, Jesus’ trial is in progress, apparently in a part of Caiaphas’ house that is above
the courtyard. Peter and the others waiting below may see the comings and goings of various
witnesses who are brought in to testify.
Peter’s Galilean accent is an indication that
his denial is false. Moreover, one in the group is
related to Malchus, whose ear Peter cut o?. So
the charge is leveled against Peter: “I saw you
in the garden with him, did I not?” When Peter
denies this for a third time, a rooster crows, as
was foretold.—John 13:38; 18:26, 27.
At that point, Jesus apparently is on a balcony overlooking the courtyard. The Lord turns and
looks straight at Peter, which must pierce Peter
to the core. He recalls what Jesus said only a few
hours earlier in the upper room. Imagine how Peter feels as the realization of what he has done
crashes down on him! Peter goes outside and
weeps bitterly.—Luke 22:61, 62.
How could this happen? How could Peter—who
was so certain of his spiritual strength and loyalty—deny his Master? Truth is being distorted,
and Jesus is being depicted as a vile criminal.
When Peter could have stood up for an innocent
man, he turned his back on the very One who has
“sayings of everlasting life.”—John 6:68.
Peter’s tragic experience shows that even a
person of faith and devotion can be thrown o?
balance if he is not properly prepared for unexpected trials or temptations. May what Peter
went through serve as a warning to all of God’s
servants!

?

PETER DENIES JESUS

126

 How do Peter and John gain entrance to the courtyard at Caiaphas’ house?
 While Peter and John are in the courtyard, what is going on in the house?
 What does it mean that Peter curses and swears?
 Peter’s experience contains what serious lesson?
289

TRIED BY THE SANHEDRIN, THEN ON TO PILATE
MATTHEW 27:1-11 MARK 15:1 LUKE 22:66–23:3 JOHN 18:28-35

The night is drawing to a close when Peter denies Jesus for the third time. The members of
the Sanhedrin have ?nished with their mock
trial and have dispersed. Come dawn Friday
morning, they reconvene, likely to give some
cloak of legality to the illegal night trial. Jesus
is brought before them.
Again the court demands: “If you are the
Christ, tell us.” Jesus answers: “Even if I told
you, you would not believe it at all. Moreover, if
I questioned you, you would not answer.” However, Jesus courageously indicates to them his
identity as the one foretold at Daniel 7:13. He
says: “From now on the Son of man will be seated at the powerful right hand of God.”—Luke 22:
67-69; Matthew 26:63.
They persist: “Are you, therefore, the Son of
God?” Jesus replies: “You yourselves are saying
that I am.” This seems to justify killing Jesus
on the charge of blasphemy. “Why do we need

further testimony?” they ask. (Luke 22:70, 71;
Mark 14:64) So they bind Jesus and lead him
away to Roman Governor Pontius Pilate.
Judas Iscariot may see Jesus being taken to
Pilate. When Judas realizes that Jesus has been
condemned, he feels a certain remorse and despair. However, rather than turning to God in
true repentance, he goes to give back the 30
pieces of silver. Judas tells the chief priests: “I
sinned when I betrayed innocent blood.” But he
gets the heartless reply: “What is that to us?
You must see to it!”—Matthew 27:4.
Judas throws the 30 silver pieces into the
temple and then adds to his wrongs by attempting self-murder. As Judas tries to hang himself, apparently the branch to which he ties the
rope breaks. His body drops to the rocks below,
where it bursts apart.—Acts 1:17, 18.
It is still early in the morning when Jesus
is taken to the palace of Pontius Pilate. But

?

MORNING TRIAL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN
JUDAS ISCARIOT TRIES TO HANG HIMSELF
JESUS IS SENT TO PILATE TO BE CONDEMNED
?

?

the Jews taking him there refuse to enter. They
think that such contact with Gentiles will de?le them. That would disqualify them from eating the meal on Nisan 15, the ?rst day of the
Festival of Unleavened Bread, which is viewed
as part of the Passover period.
Pilate comes out and asks them: “What accusation do you bring against this man?” They respond: “If this man were not a wrongdoer, we
would not have handed him over to you.” Pilate
may feel that they are trying to pressure him,
so he says: “Take him yourselves and judge him
according to your law.” The Jews reveal their
murderous intent, replying: “It is not lawful for
us to kill anyone.”—John 18:29-31.
Actually, if they kill Jesus during the Passover
festival, it will likely cause a public uproar. Yet
if they can get the Romans to execute Jesus on
a political charge, which the Romans are authorized to do, it will tend to absolve these Jews of
responsibility before the people.
The religious leaders do not tell Pilate that
they had condemned Jesus for blasphemy. Now
they trump up di?erent charges: “We found this
man [1] subverting our nation, [2] forbidding
the paying of taxes to Caesar, and [3] saying he
himself is Christ a king.”—Luke 23:2.
As a representative of Rome, Pilate has reason for concern about the charge that Jesus is
claiming to be a king. So Pilate reenters the palace, calls Jesus to him, and asks: “Are you the

127

King of the Jews?” In other words, ‘Have you
broken the law of the empire by declaring yourself to be a king in opposition to Caesar?’ Perhaps to ?nd out how much Pilate already has
heard about him, Jesus says: “Are you asking
this of your own originality, or did others tell
you about me?”—John 18:33, 34.
Professing ignorance of the facts about Jesus but desiring to learn them, Pilate replies: “I
am not a Jew, am I?” He adds: “Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to
me. What did you do?”—John 18:35.
Jesus does not attempt to dodge the central
issue—kingship. He answers in a way that no
doubt greatly surprises Governor Pilate.

THE FIELD OF BLOOD The chief priests are not

sure what to do with the silver pieces that Judas
throws into the temple. “It is not lawful to put
them into the sacred treasury,” they say,
“because they are the price of blood.”
So they use the money to purchase
the potter’s ?eld in which to bury
strangers. It comes to be called
the “Field of Blood.”
—Matthew 27:6-8.

 Why does the Sanhedrin reconvene in the morning?
 How does Judas die, and what happens to the 30 pieces of silver?
 On what charges do the Jews want Pilate to have Jesus killed?
291

FOUND INNOCENT BY BOTH PILATE AND HEROD
MATTHEW 27:12-14, 18, 19 MARK 15:2-5 LUKE 23:4-16 JOHN 18:36-38

Jesus does not try to conceal from Pilate that
he really is a king. Still, his Kingdom is no threat
to Rome. “My Kingdom is no part of this world,”
Jesus says. “If my Kingdom were part of this
world, my attendants would have fought that I
should not be handed over to the Jews. But as
it is, my Kingdom is not from this source.” (John
18:36) Yes, Jesus has a Kingdom, but it is not
of this world.
Pilate does not leave the issue at that. He
asks: “Well, then, are you a king?” Jesus lets Pilate know that he has drawn the right conclusion, answering: “You yourself are saying that I
am a king. For this I have been born, and for
this I have come into the world, that I should
bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is on
the side of the truth listens to my voice.”—John
18:37.
Jesus had earlier told Thomas: “I am the way
and the truth and the life.” Now even Pilate
hears that the purpose of Jesus’ being sent to
earth is to bear witness to “the truth,” specifically the truth about his Kingdom. Jesus is determined to be faithful to that truth even if it
costs him his life. Pilate asks: “What is truth?”
but he does not wait for further explanation. He
feels that he has heard enough to judge this
man.—John 14:6; 18:38.
Pilate returns to the crowd waiting outside
the palace. Jesus apparently is at his side
when he tells the chief priests and those with
them: “I ?nd no crime in this man.” Angered by
that decision, the crowd insists: “He stirs up
the people by teaching throughout all Judea,
starting from Galilee even to here.”—Luke 23:
4, 5.
The Jews’ unreasoning fanaticism must
amaze Pilate. As the chief priests and older men
292

continue shouting, Pilate asks Jesus: “Do you
not hear how many things they are testifying
against you?” (Matthew 27:13) Jesus makes no
attempt to answer. His calm in the face of the
wild accusations surprises Pilate.
The Jews indicated that Jesus had ‘started
from Galilee.’ Pursuing that clue, Pilate learns
that Jesus is, in fact, a Galilean. This gives Pilate an idea of how he might escape responsibility for judging Jesus. Herod Antipas (the son
of Herod the Great) is the ruler of Galilee, and
he is in Jerusalem this Passover season. So Pilate sends Jesus to Herod. It was Herod Antipas who had John the Baptist beheaded. Later,
at hearing that Jesus was performing miraculous works, Herod was concerned that Jesus
might be John raised from the dead.—Luke 9:
7-9.
Herod now rejoices at the prospect of seeing
Jesus. This is not because he wants to help Jesus or wishes to make any real attempt to learn
whether there are valid charges against him.
Herod is simply curious, and he is “hoping to
see some sign performed by him.” (Luke 23:8)
However, Jesus does not satisfy Herod’s curiosity. In fact, as Herod questions him, Jesus says
not a word. Disappointed, both Herod and his
soldiers treat Jesus “with contempt.” (Luke 23:
11) They clothe him with a splendid garment
and mock him. Then Herod sends Jesus back to
Pilate. Herod and Pilate had been enemies, but
now they become good friends.
When Jesus returns, Pilate calls together the
chief priests, the Jewish rulers, and the people
and says: “I examined him in front of you but
found in this man no grounds for the charges
you are bringing against him. In fact, neither
did Herod, for he sent him back to us, and look!

?

he has done nothing deserving of death. I will
therefore punish him and release him.”—Luke
23:14-16.
Pilate is eager to free Jesus, for he realizes that it is out of envy that the priests have
handed him over. As Pilate tries to release Jesus, he receives further motivation to do so.

JESUS IS EXAMINED BY PILATE AND BY HEROD

128

While he is on his judgment seat, his wife sends
him the message: “Have nothing to do with that
righteous man, for I su?ered a lot today in a
dream [evidently of divine origin] because of
him.”—Matthew 27:19.
How can Pilate release this innocent man, as
he should?

 How does Jesus tell “the truth” regarding his kingship?
 Pilate reaches what conclusion about Jesus, how do the people respond, and what does Pilate do?
 Why is Herod Antipas pleased to see Jesus, and what does he do with him?
 Why does Pilate want to free Jesus?
293

PILATE PROCLAIMS: “LOOK! THE MAN!”
MATTHEW 27:15-17, 20-30 MARK 15:6-19 LUKE 23:18-25 JOHN 18:39–19:5

Pilate told the crowd seeking Jesus’ death: “I
. . . found in this man no grounds for the
charges you are bringing against him. In fact,
neither did Herod.” (Luke 23:14, 15) Now, trying
to spare Jesus, Pilate uses another approach,
saying to the people: “You have a custom that I
should release a man to you at the Passover. So
do you want me to release to you the King of the
Jews?”—John 18:39.
Pilate is aware of a prisoner named Barabbas, who is known as a robber, a seditionist,
and a murderer. So Pilate asks: “Which one do
you want me to release to you, Barabbas or Jesus the so-called Christ?” Having been stirred
up by the chief priests, the people ask that Barabbas be released, not Jesus. Pilate asks again:
“Which of the two do you want me to release to
you?” The crowd shouts: “Barabbas”!—Matthew
27:17, 21.
Dismayed, Pilate asks: “What, then, should I
do with Jesus the so-called Christ?” The people
roar: “To the stake with him!” (Matthew 27:22)
To their shame, they are demanding the death
of an innocent man. Pilate pleads: “Why? What
bad thing did this man do? I found in him noth-

ing deserving of death; I will therefore punish
him and release him.”—Luke 23:22.
Despite Pilate’s repeated e?orts, the enraged
crowd yells in unison: “To the stake with him!”
(Matthew 27:23) The religious leaders have
worked the crowd into such a frenzy that they
want blood! And it is not the blood of some
criminal, some murderer. It is the blood of an innocent man who ?ve days before was welcomed
into Jerusalem as King. If Jesus’ disciples are
present, they remain silent and inconspicuous.
Pilate sees that his appeals are doing no
good. An uproar is arising, so he takes some
water and washes his hands before the eyes of
the crowd. He tells them: “I am innocent of the
blood of this man. You yourselves must see to
it.” Even that does not put the people o?. Rather, they say: “Let his blood come upon us and
upon our children.”—Matthew 27:24, 25.
The governor wishes to satisfy them more
than he wishes to do what he knows is right.
So in accord with their demand, Pilate releases
Barabbas to the mob. He has Jesus stripped
and then scourged.
After this torturous beating, the soldiers take

SCOURGING Dr. William D. Edwards in The Journal of the American Medical

Association describes the Roman practice of scourging:
“The usual instrument was a short whip (?agrum or ?agellum) with
several single or braided leather thongs of variable lengths, in which small
iron balls or sharp pieces of sheep bones were tied at intervals. . . .
As the Roman soldiers repeatedly struck the victim’s back with full force,
the iron balls would cause deep contusions, and the leather thongs and
sheep bones would cut into the skin and subcutaneous tissues. Then, as
the ?ogging continued, the lacerations would tear into the underlying
skeletal muscles and produce quivering ribbons of bleeding ?esh.”
294

?

?

Jesus into the governor’s palace. The body of
troops gather and heap further abuse on him.
They braid a crown of thorns and push it down
on his head. The soldiers also put a reed in Jesus’ right hand and put a scarlet-colored robe
on him, such as is worn by royalty. They say with
scorn: “Greetings, you King of the Jews!” (Matthew 27:28, 29) More than that, they spit on Jesus and keep slapping his face. Taking the sturdy reed from him, they hit him on the head with
it, driving deeper into his scalp the sharp thorns
of his humiliating “crown.”
Jesus’ remarkable dignity and strength
through all of this so impresses Pilate that he
makes another attempt to absolve himself, saying: “See! I bring him outside to you in order for
you to know that I ?nd no fault in him.” Could Pilate think that bringing Jesus out now, bruised
and bleeding, would move the crowds to relent?
As Jesus stands before the heartless mob, Pilate proclaims: “Look! The man!”—John 19:4, 5.
Though battered and wounded, Jesus displays a quiet dignity and calm that even Pilate
must acknowledge, for his words seem to mingle respect with pity.

 How does Pilate attempt to have Jesus released
and thereby absolve himself of responsibility?
 What is involved in being scourged?
 After Jesus is scourged, how is he further
mistreated?

PILATE ATTEMPTS TO FREE JESUS
? THE JEWS ASK FOR BARABBAS
JESUS IS MOCKED AND MISTREATED

129

JESUS IS HANDED OVER AND LED AWAY TO DIE
MATTHEW 27:31, 32 MARK 15:20, 21 LUKE 23:24-31 JOHN 19:6-17

Despite Jesus’ having been viciously abused
and ridiculed, Pilate’s e?orts to release him do
not move the chief priests and their accomplices. They want nothing to prevent having
Jesus put to death. They keep shouting: “To
the stake with him! To the stake with him!” Pilate responds: “Take him yourselves and execute him, for I do not ?nd any fault in him.”
—John 19:6.
The Jews do not convince Pilate that Jesus is
worthy of death on a political charge, but what
about a religious one? They fall back on the
charge of blasphemy that was raised at Jesus’
trial before the Sanhedrin. “We have a law,”
they say, “and according to the law he ought to
die, because he made himself God’s son.” (John
19:7) This is a new charge for Pilate.
He goes back into his palace and tries to ?nd
a way to release this man who has borne up under severe treatment and about whom Pilate’s
own wife had a dream. (Matthew 27:19) What of
this new charge that the Jews are making—that
the prisoner is “God’s son”? Pilate knows that
Jesus is from Galilee. (Luke 23:5-7) Yet he asks
Jesus: “Where are you from?” (John 19:9) Could
Pilate be wondering whether Jesus might have
lived before and, in some sense, be of divine origin?
Pilate had heard directly from Jesus that he
is a king but that his Kingdom is no part of this
world. Not needing to elaborate on what he earlier said, Jesus remains silent. His refusal to reply stings Pilate’s pride, and he indignantly says
to Jesus: “Are you refusing to speak to me? Do
you not know that I have authority to release
you and I have authority to execute you?”—John
19:10.
Jesus says simply: “You would have no au296

thority over me at all unless it had been granted to you from above. This is why the man who
handed me over to you has greater sin.” (John
19:11) Jesus likely does not have in mind one
speci?c individual. Rather, he means that Caiaphas, his accomplices, and Judas Iscariot bear
a heavier responsibility than Pilate does.
Impressed by Jesus’ comportment and
words, and increasingly fearful that Jesus may
be of divine origin, Pilate tries again to release
him. However, the Jews bring up another fear
that Pilate must have. They threaten: “If you
release this man, you are not a friend of Caesar. Everyone who makes himself a king speaks
against Caesar.”—John 19:12.
The governor brings Jesus outside once more
and, sitting on the judgment seat, tells the people: “See! Your king!” The Jews will not relent,
though. “Take him away! Take him away! To
the stake with him!” they shout. Pilate pleads:
“Shall I execute your king?” The Jews have long
chafed under Roman rule; still, the chief priests
boldly assert: “We have no king but Caesar.”
—John 19:14, 15.
Cowardly caving in under the Jews’ relentless
demands, Pilate hands Jesus over to be executed. The soldiers strip the scarlet-colored cloak
o? Jesus and put on his outer garments. As
Jesus is led o?, he must bear his own torture
stake.
It is now well into the morning of Friday, Nisan 14. Jesus has been awake since early Thursday morning and has su?ered one agonizing experience after another. As he struggles under
the weight of the stake, Jesus’ strength gives
out. So the soldiers force a passerby, Simon
from Cyrene in Africa, to carry the stake to the
place of execution. Many people follow, some

?

beating themselves in grief and bewailing what
is happening.
Jesus says to the grieving women: “Daughters of Jerusalem, stop weeping for me. Weep
instead for yourselves and for your children;
for look! days are coming when people will say,
‘Happy are the barren women, the wombs that
did not give birth and the breasts that did not
nurse!’ Then they will start saying to the mountains, ‘Fall over us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us
over!’ If they do these things when the tree

? PILATE TRIES TO RELEASE JESUS
JESUS IS CONDEMNED AND SENT TO DIE

130

is moist, what will occur when it is withered?”
—Luke 23:28-31.
Jesus is referring to the Jewish nation. It is
like a dying tree that still has some moisture
left, for Jesus is present and so are a number of
Jews who believe in him. When these are taken
out from the nation, only a spiritually withered
national organization will remain, being like a
dead tree. There will be intense weeping when
the Roman armies act as God’s executioners
against that nation!

 The religious leaders make what charge against Jesus?
 Why does Pilate grow fearful?
 How do the chief priests get Pilate to have Jesus executed?
 What does Jesus mean by referring to the tree as “moist” and then “withered”?
297

AN INNOCENT KING SUFFERS ON THE STAKE
MATTHEW 27:33- 44 MARK 15:22-32 LUKE 23:32- 43 JOHN 19:17-24

Jesus is led to a location not far from the city
where he and two robbers are to be executed.
The place is called Golgotha, or Skull Place, and
is a spot that is visible “from a distance.”—Mark
15:40.
The three condemned men are stripped of
their garments. Then wine drugged with myrrh
and bitter gall is provided. Apparently, women
of Jerusalem have prepared the mixture, and
the Romans do not deny this pain-dulling potion to those being put to death. Upon tasting
it, though, Jesus refuses to drink any. Why? He
wants to have full possession of all his senses
during this major test; he wants to be conscious
and faithful to death.
Jesus is stretched out on the stake. (Mark 15:
25) The soldiers pound nails into his hands and
his feet, piercing ?esh and ligaments, causing
intense pain. As the stake is swung upright, the
pain is even more excruciating as the weight
of Jesus’ body tears at his wounds. Yet, Jesus
does not berate the soldiers. He prays: “Father,
forgive them, for they do not know what they
are doing.”—Luke 23:34.
The Romans customarily post a sign stating
the crime of the condemned criminal. This time,
Pilate has posted a sign that reads: “Jesus the
Nazarene the King of the Jews.” It is written
in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek, so most everyone
can read it. Pilate’s act re?ects his disdain for
the Jews who insisted on Jesus’ death. The dismayed chief priests protest: “Do not write, ‘The
King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am King of
the Jews.’ ” However, not wanting to be their
pawn once again, Pilate answers: “What I have
written, I have written.”—John 19:19-22.
The enraged priests repeat the false testimony that was given earlier at the Sanhedrin trials.
298

Not surprisingly, passersby wag their heads in
mockery and say abusively: “Ha! You who would
throw down the temple and build it in three
days, save yourself by coming down o? the
torture stake.” Similarly, the chief priests and
scribes say to one another: “Let the Christ, the
King of Israel, now come down o? the torture
stake, so that we may see and believe.” (Mark
15:29-32) Even the condemned robbers on Jesus’ left and right reproach him, though he is
the only one truly innocent.

The four Roman soldiers also make fun of Jesus. They may have been drinking sour wine, so
now in mockery they apparently hold some of it
before Jesus, who obviously cannot reach out
and take any. The Romans tauntingly allude to
the sign above Jesus’ head and say: “If you are
the King of the Jews, save yourself.” (Luke 23:
36, 37) Think of it! The man who has proved to
be the way, the truth, and the life is now being
subjected to undeserved abuse and ridicule. Yet
he resolutely su?ers it all, without reproaching

? JESUS IS NAILED TO A TORTURE STAKE
THE SIGN OVER JESUS’ HEAD PROVOKES MOCKERY
JESUS OFFERS HOPE OF LIFE IN PARADISE ON EARTH
?

?

the Jews who are watching, the Roman soldiers
mocking him, or the two condemned criminals
hanging on stakes alongside him.
The four soldiers have taken Jesus’ outer garments and divided them into four parts. They
cast lots to see who gets which piece. Jesus’
inner garment, though, is of superior quality,
“without a seam, being woven from top to bottom.” The soldiers reason: “Let us not tear it,
but let us cast lots over it to decide whose it
will be.” They thus ful?ll the scripture that says:
“They divided my garments among themselves,
and they cast lots for my clothing.”—John 19:
23, 24; Psalm 22:18.
In time, one of the criminals realizes that Jesus truly must be a king. He rebukes his companion with the words: “Do you not fear God at
all, now that you have received the same judgment? And we rightly so, for we are getting back
what we deserve for the things we did; but this
man did nothing wrong.” Then he beseeches
Jesus: “Remember me when you get into your
Kingdom.”—Luke 23:40-42.
Jesus replies: “Truly I tell you today, you will
be with me,” not in the Kingdom, but “in Paradise.” (Luke 23:43) This promise di?ers from
what Jesus has told his apostles, namely, that
they would sit on thrones with him in the Kingdom. (Matthew 19:28; Luke 22:29, 30) However, this Jewish criminal may have heard about

131

the earthly Paradise that Jehovah had originally provided as a home for Adam, Eve, and their
descendants. Now this robber can die with that
hope before him.

 Why does Jesus refuse to drink the wine o?ered to him?
 What sign is posted over Jesus’ head, and how do the Jews react to it?
 How is prophecy ful?lled in what is done with Jesus’ garments?
 What prospect does Jesus hold out to one of the criminals?
299

“CERTAINLY THIS MAN WAS GOD’S SON”
MATTHEW 27:45-56 MARK 15:33- 41 LUKE 23:44- 49 JOHN 19:25-30

It is now “the sixth hour,” or noon. A strange
darkness falls “over all the land until the ninth
hour,” three o’clock in the afternoon. (Mark 15:
33) This eerie darkness is not caused by a solar eclipse. Those occur at the time of the new
moon, but this is Passover season, when the
moon is full. And this darkness lasts much longer than the few minutes of an eclipse. So God
has caused this darkness!
Imagine the e?ect this must have on those
mocking Jesus. During this dark period, four
women approach the torture stake. They are
Jesus’ mother, Salome, Mary Magdalene, and
Mary the mother of the apostle James the Less.
The apostle John is with Jesus’ grieving
mother “by the torture stake.” Mary watches
the son she bore and nurtured as he hangs
there in agony. For her, it is like being pierced
by “a long sword.” (John 19:25; Luke 2:35) Despite his intense pain, however, Jesus thinks of
her welfare. He makes the e?ort to nod toward
John and say to his mother: “Woman, see! Your
son!” Then, nodding toward Mary, he tells John:
“See! Your mother!”—John 19:26, 27.
Jesus is entrusting the care of his mother,

“TO THE STAKE” Jesus’ enemies yelled:

“To the stake with him!” (John 19:15)
The basic Greek word for “stake” used
in the Gospel accounts is stau·ros.
The book History of the Cross reports:
“Stauros means ‘an upright pale,’
a strong stake, such as farmers drive
into the ground to make their fences
or palisades—no more, no less.”
300

who is evidently now a widow, to the apostle
whom he especially loves. Jesus is aware that
his half brothers, Mary’s other sons, have not as
yet put faith in him. So he is making provision
for his mother’s physical care as well as for her
spiritual needs. What a ?ne example!
About the time the darkness ends, Jesus
says: “I am thirsty.” In this he is ful?lling the
scriptures. (John 19:28; Psalm 22:15) Jesus
senses that his Father has, as it were, withdrawn his protection so that his Son’s integrity might be tested to the limit. Christ calls
out in what may be Aramaic of a Galilean dialect: “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” which means,
“My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
Some standing nearby misunderstand him and
exclaim: “See! He is calling Elijah.” One of them
runs and, placing a sponge soaked with sour
wine on the end of a reed, gives Jesus a drink.
But others say: “Let him be! Let us see whether Elijah comes to take him down.”—Mark 15:
34-36.
Jesus then cries out: “It has been accomplished!” (John 19:30) Yes, he has accomplished all that his Father sent him to earth to
do. Finally, Jesus says: “Father, into your hands
I entrust my spirit.” (Luke 23:46) Jesus thus
commits to Jehovah his life force, con?dent
that God will restore it to him. With undiminished trust in God, Christ bows his head and
dies.
At that, a violent earthquake occurs, splitting rocks. It is so powerful that tombs outside Jerusalem break open and corpses are
thrown out of them. Passersby who see the
dead bodies exposed enter “the holy city” and
report what they just witnessed.—Matthew 12:
11; 27:51-53.

?

When Jesus dies, the long, heavy curtain
that divides the Holy from the Most Holy in
God’s temple is ripped in two, from top to bottom. The astonishing event is a manifestation
of God’s wrath against those who killed his
Son and signi?es that the way into the Most
Holy, heaven itself, is now possible.—Hebrews
9:2, 3; 10:19, 20.
Understandably, the people become very
afraid. The army o?cer in charge at the execution proclaims: “Certainly this man was God’s
Son.” (Mark 15:39) He may have been there
at Jesus’ trial before Pilate when the issue of
divine sonship was discussed. Now he is convinced that Jesus is righteous and is, in fact,
the Son of God.
Others, overcome by these unusual events,
head to their homes, “beating their chests” as a
gesture of their intense grief and shame. (Luke
23:48) Among those observing at a distance
are many female disciples who at times traveled
with Jesus. They too are deeply moved by all
these momentous events.

 Why can a solar eclipse not be the cause of the
three hours of darkness?
 Jesus provides what ?ne example as to caring
for aged parents?
 What does the earthquake cause, and what
is signi?ed by the temple curtain’s being
ripped in two?
 How do Jesus’ death and surrounding events
a?ect those present?

? JESUS DIES ON THE STAKE
UNUSUAL EVENTS AT JESUS’ DEATH

132

JESUS’ BODY IS PREPARED AND BURIED
MATTHEW 27:57–28:2 MARK 15:42–16:4 LUKE 23:50–24:3 JOHN 19:31–20:1

It is getting late on Friday afternoon, Nisan 14.
At sundown, the Sabbath of Nisan 15 will begin. Jesus is already dead, but the two robbers
alongside him are still alive. According to the
Law, dead bodies “should not remain all night
on the stake” but, rather, should be buried “on
that day.”—Deuteronomy 21:22, 23.
Furthermore, Friday afternoon is called Preparation because people prepare meals and
complete any other tasks that cannot wait until after the Sabbath. At sunset, a double, or
“great,” Sabbath will begin. (John 19:31) This
is so because Nisan 15 will be the ?rst day
of the seven-day Festival of Unleavened Bread,

the ?rst day of which is always a Sabbath. (Leviticus 23:5, 6) This time that ?rst day coincides
with the weekly Sabbath, the seventh day.
So the Jews ask Pilate to hasten the death of
Jesus and the two robbers alongside him. How?
By having their legs broken. That will make it impossible for them to use their legs to raise their
bodies so as to breathe. The soldiers come and
break the legs of the two robbers. But Jesus appears to be dead, and thus they do not break his
legs. This ful?lls Psalm 34:20: “He is guarding
all his bones; not one of them has been broken.”
To remove any doubt that Jesus is truly dead,
a soldier jabs a spear into his side, piercing the

?

region of his heart. ‘Immediately blood and water come out.’ (John 19:34) This ful?lls another
scripture: “They will look to the one whom they
pierced.”—Zechariah 12:10.
Joseph from the city of Arimathea, “a rich
man” and reputable member of the Sanhedrin,
is also present at the execution. (Matthew 27:
57) He is described as “a good and righteous
man,” who is “waiting for the Kingdom of God.”
In fact, as “a disciple of Jesus but a secret one
because of his fear of the Jews,” he did not
support the court’s judgment of Jesus. (Luke
23:50; Mark 15:43; John 19:38) Joseph takes
courage and asks Pilate for Jesus’ body. Pilate summons the army o?cer in charge, who
con?rms that Jesus is dead. Thereupon, Pilate
grants Joseph’s request.
Joseph buys clean, ?ne linen and takes Jesus’ body down from the stake. He wraps the
corpse in the linen in preparation for burial.
Nicodemus, “who had come to [Jesus] in the
night the ?rst time,” helps with the preparation.
(John 19:39) He brings about a hundred Roman
pounds (72 modern pounds) of a costly mixture
of myrrh and aloes. Jesus’ body is wrapped in
bandages containing these spices, according to
the Jews’ burial custom.
Joseph owns an unused tomb carved in rock

JESUS’ BODY IS TAKEN DOWN FROM THE STAKE
? THE BODY IS PREPARED FOR BURIAL
? WOMEN FIND AN EMPTY TOMB

133

nearby, and Jesus’ body is laid in it. Then a large
stone is rolled in front of the tomb. This is hastily done, before the Sabbath begins. Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James the Less
may have been helping with the preparation of
Jesus’ body. They now hurry home “to prepare
spices and perfumed oils” to treat Jesus’ body
further after the Sabbath.—Luke 23:56.
The next day, the Sabbath, the chief priests
and Pharisees go to Pilate and say: “We recall
what that impostor said while he was still alive,
‘After three days I am to be raised up.’ Therefore,
command that the grave be made secure until
the third day, so that his disciples may not come
and steal him and say to the people, ‘He was
raised up from the dead!’ Then this last deception will be worse than the ?rst.” Pilate replies:
“You may have a guard. Go make it as secure as
you know how.”—Matthew 27:63-65.
Very early Sunday morning, Mary Magdalene,
Mary the mother of James, and other women
bring spices to the tomb to treat Jesus’ body.
They say to one another: “Who will roll the stone
away from the entrance of the tomb for us?”
(Mark 16:3) But an earthquake has occurred.
Moreover, God’s angel has rolled the stone
away, the guards are gone, and the tomb appears empty!

 Why is Friday called Preparation, and why is this a “great” Sabbath?
 What do Joseph and Nicodemus have to do with Jesus’ burial, and what is their relationship to Jesus?
 What do the priests want done, but what occurs early Sunday morning?
303

AN EMPTY TOMB—JESUS IS ALIVE!
MATTHEW 28:3-15 MARK 16:5-8 LUKE 24:4-12 JOHN 20:2-18

What a shock it is for the women to discover
what appears to be an empty burial place! Mary
Magdalene runs o? to “Simon Peter and to the
other disciple, for whom Jesus had a?ection”
—the apostle John. (John 20:2) However, the
other women at the tomb see an angel. And inside the memorial tomb is another angel, who is
“clothed in a white robe.”—Mark 16:5.
One of the angels tells them: “Do not be
afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus
who was executed on the stake. He is not here,
for he was raised up, just as he said. Come, see
the place where he was lying. Then go quickly
and tell his disciples that he was raised up from
the dead, for look! he is going ahead of you into
Galilee.” (Matthew 28:5-7) So “trembling and
overwhelmed with emotion,” the women run to
report to the disciples.—Mark 16:8.

By now, Mary has found Peter and John.
Breathlessly, she reports: “They have taken
away the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not
know where they have laid him.” (John 20:2) Peter and John take o? running. John is faster and
reaches the tomb ?rst. He peers into it and sees
the bandages, but he remains outside.
When Peter arrives, he goes right in. He sees
the linen cloths and the cloth used to wrap Jesus’ head. John now enters, and he believes
Mary’s report. Despite what Jesus said earlier, neither of them understands that he has
been raised up. (Matthew 16:21) Puzzled, they
head home. But Mary, who has come back to the
tomb, remains there.
Meanwhile, the other women are on their way
to tell the disciples that Jesus has been raised.
While they are running to do so, Jesus meets

? JESUS IS RESURRECTED
EXPERIENCES AT JESUS’ TOMB
HE APPEARS TO VARIOUS WOMEN
?

?

them and says: “Good day!” They fall at his feet
and ‘do obeisance to him.’ Then Jesus says:
“Have no fear! Go, report to my brothers so that
they may go to Galilee, and there they will see
me.”—Matthew 28:9, 10.
Earlier, when the earthquake occurred and
the angels appeared, the soldiers at the tomb
“trembled and became as dead men.” After recovering, they entered the city and “reported to
the chief priests all the things that had happened.” The priests then consulted with elders
of the Jews. The decision was made to bribe the
soldiers to hide the matter and to claim: “His
disciples came in the night and stole him while
we were sleeping.”—Matthew 28:4, 11, 13.
Roman soldiers can be put to death if they
fall asleep at their post, so the priests promise:
“If this [their lie about having been asleep] gets
to the governor’s ears, we will explain the matter to him and you will not need to worry.” (Matthew 28:14) The soldiers take the bribe and do
what the priests say. Thus the false story of Jesus’ body being stolen spreads widely among
the Jews.
Mary Magdalene is still grieving at the tomb.
Stooping forward to look into it, she sees two
angels in white! One sits at the head of where
Jesus’ body had been lying and the other at the

134

foot. “Woman, why are you weeping?” they ask.
Mary answers: “They have taken my Lord away,
and I do not know where they have laid him.”
Turning around, Mary sees someone else. He repeats the angels’ question and adds: “Whom
are you looking for?” Thinking that he is the gardener, she says: “Sir, if you have carried him o?,
tell me where you have laid him, and I will take
him away.”—John 20:13-15.
Actually, Mary is speaking to the resurrected Jesus, but at the moment she does not recognize him. However, when he says, “Mary!”
she knows that it is Jesus, recognizing him by
the familiar way he speaks to her. “Rabboni!”
(meaning, “Teacher!”), Mary exclaims joyfully.
Yet, afraid that he is about to ascend to heaven, she grabs hold of him. Hence, Jesus urges
her: “Stop clinging to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers
and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father
and your Father and to my God and your God.’ ”
—John 20:16, 17.
Mary runs to the place where the apostles
and other disciples are gathered. She tells
them: “I have seen the Lord!” adding her account to what they have heard from the other
women. (John 20:18) Yet, the reports ‘seem like
nonsense to them.’—Luke 24:11.

 After Mary Magdalene ?nds the tomb empty, what experiences do she and the other women have?
 How do Peter and John react at ?nding the tomb empty?
 Whom do the other women encounter on their way to the disciples, and what happens when Mary Magdalene is again at the tomb?
 How do the disciples respond to the reports they get?
305

THE RESURRECTED JESUS APPEARS TO MANY
LUKE 24:13- 49 JOHN 20:19-29

On Sunday, Nisan 16, the disciples are in low
spirits. They do not grasp the meaning of the
empty tomb. (Matthew 28:9, 10; Luke 24:11)
Later in the day, Cleopas and another disciple
leave Jerusalem for Emmaus, which is about
seven miles away.
As they walk, they discuss what has occurred.
Then a stranger joins them. He asks: “What are
these matters that you are debating between
yourselves as you walk along?” Cleopas replies:
“Are you a stranger dwelling alone in Jerusalem
and do not know the things that have occurred
there during these days?” The stranger asks:
“What things?”—Luke 24:17-19.
“The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene,”
they say. “We were hoping that this man was the
one who was going to deliver Israel.”—Luke 24:
19-21.
Cleopas and his companion go on to relate
things that happened that very day. They say
that some women who went to the tomb where
Jesus was buried found it empty and that these
women were eyewitnesses to a supernatural
event—the appearance of angels who said that
Jesus is alive. They report that others also went
to the tomb and “found it just as the women had
said.”—Luke 24:24.
The two disciples are clearly bewildered as to
the meaning of what has occurred. The stranger responds with authority to correct their
wrong thinking, which is a?ecting their hearts:
“O senseless ones and slow of heart to believe
all the things the prophets have spoken! Was
it not necessary for the Christ to su?er these
things and to enter into his glory?” (Luke 24:
25, 26) He goes on to interpret for them many
Scriptural passages pertaining to the Christ.
Finally the three arrive near Emmaus. The two
306

disciples want to hear more, so they urge the
stranger: “Stay with us, because it is almost
evening and the day is nearly over.” He agrees
to stay, and they have a meal. As the stranger says a prayer, breaks bread, and hands it
to them, they recognize him, but then he disappears. (Luke 24:29-31) Now they know for
sure that Jesus is alive!
The two disciples excitedly comment on what
they experienced: “Were not our hearts burning
within us as he was speaking to us on the road,
as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to
us?” (Luke 24:32) They hurry back to Jerusalem, where they ?nd the apostles and others
with them. Before Cleopas and his companion
can give a report, they hear others say: “For a
fact the Lord was raised up, and he appeared
to Simon!” (Luke 24:34) Then the two tell how
Jesus appeared to them. Yes, they too are eyewitnesses.
Now all are shocked—Jesus appears in the
room! This seems unbelievable because they
locked the doors out of fear of the Jews. Still,
Jesus is standing right in their midst. He calmly
says: “May you have peace.” But they are frightened. As they did once before, they are ‘imagining that they are seeing a spirit.’—Luke 24:36,
37; Matthew 14:25-27.
To prove that he is no apparition or something they merely imagine but, rather, that he
does have a ?eshly body, Jesus shows them his
hands and feet and says: “Why are you troubled, and why have doubts come up in your
hearts? See my hands and my feet, that it is
I myself; touch me and see, for a spirit does
not have ?esh and bones just as you see that I
have.” (Luke 24:36-39) They are overjoyed and
amazed but still somewhat reluctant to believe.

?

? JESUS APPEARS ON THE ROAD TO EMMAUS
HE REPEATEDLY OPENS UP THE SCRIPTURES TO HIS DISCIPLES
? THOMAS CEASES TO DOUBT

Further attempting to help them to see that
he is real, he asks: “Do you have something
there to eat?” He accepts a piece of broiled ?sh
and eats it. Then he says: “These are my words
that I spoke to you while I was yet with you [before my death], that all the things written about
me in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and
Psalms must be ful?lled.”—Luke 24:41-44.
Jesus had helped Cleopas and his companion to understand the Scriptures, and he does
so now for all those gathered there: “This is
what is written: that the Christ would su?er
and rise from among the dead on the third day,
and on the basis of his name, repentance for
forgiveness of sins would be preached in all
the nations—starting out from Jerusalem. You
are to be witnesses of these things.”—Luke 24:
46-48.
For some reason the apostle Thomas is not
present. In the following days, others joyfully
tell him: “We have seen the Lord!” Thomas responds: “Unless I see in his hands the print of
the nails and stick my ?nger into the print of the
nails and stick my hand into his side, I will never believe it.”—John 20:25.
Eight days later, the disciples are again
meeting behind locked doors, but this time
Thomas is present. Jesus appears in their
midst in a materialized body and greets them:
“May you have peace.” Turning to Thomas, Je-

135

sus says: “Put your ?nger here, and see my
hands, and take your hand and stick it into my
side, and stop doubting but believe.” Thomas
exclaims: “My Lord and my God!” (John 20:2628) Yes, he now has no doubts that Jesus is
alive as a divine being who is Jehovah God’s
representative.
“Because you have seen me, have you believed?” Jesus says. “Happy are those who have
not seen and yet believe.”—John 20:29.

 A stranger makes what inquiry of two disciples going to Emmaus?
 Why do the hearts of the disciples soon burn within them?
 When Cleopas and his companion return to Jerusalem, what exciting report do they hear,
and what then happens?
 How is Thomas ?nally convinced that Jesus is alive?
307

ON THE SHORE OF THE SEA OF GALILEE
JOHN 21:1-25

On his ?nal evening with the apostles, Jesus
had told them: “After I have been raised up, I will
go ahead of you into Galilee.” (Matthew 26:32;
28:7, 10) Now many of his followers make that
trip, but what should they do in Galilee?
At one point, Peter tells six of the apostles: “I
am going ?shing.” All six respond: “We are coming with you.” (John 21:3) The whole night, they
do not catch anything. As it is getting light, Jesus appears on the beach, but they do not realize who it is. Jesus calls out: “Children, you do
not have anything to eat, do you?” They answer:
“No!” Jesus tells them: “Cast the net on the right
side of the boat and you will ?nd some.” (John
21:5, 6) They catch so many ?sh that they cannot even draw in their net.
“It is the Lord!” John tells Peter. (John 21:7)
Quickly, Peter girds on his outer garment, which
he was not wearing while ?shing. He plunges
into the sea and swims about a hundred yards
to shore. The others in the boat follow slowly,
dragging the net full of ?sh.
Getting to shore, they see “a charcoal ?re
with ?sh lying on it and bread.” Jesus says:
“Bring some of the ?sh you just now caught.”
Peter pulls in the net, which contains 153 large
?sh! “Come, have your breakfast,” Jesus says.
None of them have the courage to ask, “Who
are you?” because they realize that it is Jesus.
(John 21:10-12) This is his third appearance to
the disciples as a group.
Jesus gives each of them some bread and
?sh to eat. Then, likely looking toward the
catch of ?sh, he asks: “Simon son of John, do
you love me more than these?” Is Peter more
attached to the ?shing business than to the
work that Jesus wants him to do? Peter replies:
“Yes, Lord, you know I have a?ection for you.”
308

So Jesus urges him: “Feed my lambs.”—John
21:15.
Again, Jesus asks: “Simon son of John, do
you love me?” Perhaps puzzled, Peter answers
earnestly: “Yes, Lord, you know I have a?ection
for you.” Jesus’ response is similar: “Shepherd
my little sheep.”—John 21:16.
The third time, Jesus asks: “Simon son of
John, do you have a?ection for me?” Now Peter may be wondering whether Jesus doubts his
loyalty. Peter says emphatically: “Lord, you are
aware of all things; you know that I have a?ection for you.” Once again Jesus highlights what
Peter must do: “Feed my little sheep.” (John
21:17) Yes, those taking the lead need to minister to those drawn into God’s sheepfold.
Jesus was bound and executed because he
did the work that God commissioned him to
do. He now reveals that Peter will have a similar end. “When you were younger,” Jesus says,
“you used to clothe yourself and walk about
where you wanted. But when you grow old, you
will stretch out your hands and another man
will clothe you and carry you where you do
not wish.” Yet Jesus urges him: “Continue following me.”—John 21:18, 19.
Peter sees the apostle John and asks: “Lord,
what about this man?” Yes, what does the future hold for the apostle for whom Jesus has
special a?ection? Jesus answers: “If it is my will
for him to remain until I come, of what concern
is that to you?” (John 21:21-23) Peter needs to
follow Jesus without worrying about what others do. Still, Jesus is indicating that John will
outlive the other apostles and will be given a vision of Jesus’ coming in Kingdom power.
Of course, there are other things that Jesus
did, more than many scrolls can contain.

?

? JESUS APPEARS AT THE SEA OF GALILEE
PETER AND OTHERS ARE TO FEED THE SHEEP

136

 What shows that the apostles are uncertain about what to do in Galilee?
 How are the apostles able to recognize Jesus at the Sea of Galilee?
 Jesus emphasizes that those taking the lead need to do what?
 How does Jesus indicate the manner in which Peter will die?
309

HUNDREDS SEE HIM PRIOR TO PENTECOST
MATTHEW 28:16-20 LUKE 24:50-52 ACTS 1:1-12; 2:1- 4

After Jesus’ resurrection, he arranges for his
11 apostles to meet him at a mountain in Galilee. Other disciples are there too, about 500
of them, some of whom initially have doubts.
(Matthew 28:17; 1 Corinthians 15:6) But what
Jesus now says helps to convince each one of
them that he truly is alive.
Jesus explains that God has given him all
authority in heaven and on earth. “Go, therefore,” Jesus urges them, “and make disciples
of people of all the nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the
things I have commanded you.” (Matthew 28:
18-20) Yes, not only is Jesus alive but he is still
interested in having the good news preached.
All of Jesus’ followers—men, women, and
children—receive this same commission to
make disciples. Opposers may try to stop their
preaching and teaching, yet Jesus assures
them: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.” What does that mean for
his followers? He tells them: “Look! I am with
you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” Jesus does not say that all who
share in preaching the good news will be enabled to do miraculous works. Still, they will
have the backing of holy spirit.
Altogether, Jesus appears to his disciples
“throughout 40 days” after his resurrection. He
materializes various bodies and shows “himself alive to them by many convincing proofs,”
instructing them “about the Kingdom of God.”
—Acts 1:3; 1 Corinthians 15:7.
Evidently while the apostles are still in Galilee, Jesus directs them to return to Jerusalem.
When meeting with them in the city, he says:
“Do not leave Jerusalem, but keep waiting for
310

what the Father has promised, about which you
heard from me; for John, indeed, baptized with
water, but you will be baptized with holy spirit
not many days after this.”—Acts 1:4, 5.
Later Jesus meets again with his apostles. He
leads “them out as far as Bethany,” which is on
the eastern slope of the Mount of Olives. (Luke
24:50) Despite everything that Jesus has told
them about his departure, they still believe that
in some way his Kingdom will be on earth.—Luke
22:16, 18, 30; John 14:2, 3.
The apostles ask Jesus: “Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?” He simply replies: “It does not belong to you to know
the times or seasons that the Father has placed
in his own jurisdiction.” Then, stressing again
the work they must do, he says: “You will receive
power when the holy spirit comes upon you, and
you will be witnesses of me in Jerusalem, in
all Judea and Samaria, and to the most distant
part of the earth.”—Acts 1:6-8.
The apostles are on the Mount of Olives with
the resurrected Jesus when he begins to rise
heavenward. Soon a cloud obscures him from
their sight. After his resurrection, Jesus had
materialized ?eshly bodies. But now Jesus dematerializes the body he used on this occasion,
and he ascends to heaven as a spirit creature.
(1 Corinthians 15:44, 50; 1 Peter 3:18) As the
faithful apostles are gazing after him, “two men
in white garments” appear beside them. These
are materialized angels, who ask: “Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This
Jesus who was taken up from you into the sky
will come in the same manner as you have seen
him going into the sky.”—Acts 1:10, 11.
Jesus left the earth without public fanfare,
his faithful followers being the only observers.

?

JESUS APPEARS TO MANY
HE ASCENDS TO HEAVEN
JESUS POURS OUT HOLY SPIRIT ON 120 DISCIPLES
?

?

He will return “in the same manner”—without
public fanfare, with only his faithful followers
discerning his presence in Kingdom power.
The apostles return to Jerusalem. During the
following days, they gather with other disciples,
including “Mary the mother of Jesus and . . .
his brothers.” (Acts 1:14) This group persist in
prayer. One subject of prayer is the choosing of
a disciple to replace Judas Iscariot and thus restore the apostolic number to 12. (Matthew 19:
28) They want a disciple who has witnessed Jesus’ activities and his resurrection. For the last
time mentioned in the Bible, lots are cast to determine God’s will. (Psalm 109:8; Proverbs 16:
33) Matthias, who may have been one of the 70
whom Jesus sent out, is selected and “counted
along with the 11 apostles.”—Acts 1:26.
Ten days after Jesus ascended to heaven,
the Jewish Festival of Pentecost 33 C.E. takes
place. About 120 of the disciples are assembled in an upper room in Jerusalem. Suddenly,
a noise just like that of a rushing sti? breeze
?lls the whole house. Tongues as if of ?re become visible, one upon each of those present.
The disciples all begin to speak in di?erent languages. This is the outpouring of the holy spirit that Jesus had promised!—John 14:26.

 Who are present when Jesus gives instructions at
a mountain in Galilee, and what does he say?
 For how long after his resurrection does Jesus
appear to his disciples, and what does he do?
 Given how he departs, in what manner is Jesus
to return?
 What occurs at Pentecost 33 C.E.?

137

CHRIST AT GOD’S RIGHT HAND
ACTS 7:56

Ten days after Jesus ascended heavenward, the
outpouring of holy spirit on the day of Pentecost provided evidence that he was, in fact,
in heaven. And additional evidence of that was
forthcoming. Just before the disciple Stephen
was stoned for his faithful witnessing, he exclaimed: “Look! I see the heavens opened up
and the Son of man standing at God’s right
hand.”—Acts 7:56.
While with his Father in heaven, Jesus would
await a speci?c command foretold in God’s
Word. David wrote under inspiration: “Jehovah
declared to my Lord [Jesus]: ‘Sit at my right
hand until I place your enemies as a stool for
your feet.’ ” When the period of waiting was
completed, he would “go subduing in the midst
of [his] enemies.” (Psalm 110:1, 2) But what
would Jesus do from heaven while awaiting the
time to take action against his enemies?
At Pentecost 33 C.E., the Christian congregation came to be. From heaven, Jesus began to rule, or reign, over his spirit-anointed
disciples. (Colossians 1:13) He guided them in
their preaching and prepared them for their
future role. What role? Those proving faithful
to death would eventually be resurrected and
would serve as associate kings with Jesus in the
Kingdom.
An outstanding example of one who would
be a future king was Saul, better known by
his Roman name Paul. He was a Jew who had
long been zealous for God’s Law, but he was so
misguided by Jewish religious leaders that he
even approved of the stoning of Stephen. Then,
“breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord,” Saul headed to Damascus. He
was authorized by High Priest Caiaphas to arrest Jesus’ disciples and bring them back to Je312

rusalem. (Acts 7:58; 9:1) However, while Saul
was en route, a bright light ?ashed around him
and he fell to the ground.
“Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” a
voice from an invisible source called out. “Who
are you, Lord?” Saul asked. “I am Jesus, whom
you are persecuting,” came the reply.—Acts 9:
4, 5.

?

Jesus told Saul to enter Damascus and await
further instructions, but he had to be led to the
city because the miraculous light had blinded
him. In a separate vision, Jesus appeared to Ananias, one of his disciples living in Damascus.
Jesus told Ananias to go to a certain address
to ?nd Saul. Ananias was apprehensive about
doing so, but Jesus assured him: “This man is
a chosen vessel to me to bear my name to the
nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.” Saul recovered his sight, and there in Damascus “he began to preach about Jesus, that
this one is the Son of God.”—Acts 9:15, 20.
With Jesus’ support, Paul and other evangelizers carried on the preaching work that Jesus had started. God blessed them with
outstanding success. About 25 years after Jesus appeared to him on the road to Damascus, Paul wrote that the good news had been
“preached in all creation under heaven.”—Colossians 1:23.
Years later, Jesus gave his beloved apostle
John a series of visions, which are found in the
Bible book of Revelation. Through these visions,
John, in e?ect, lived to see Jesus return in Kingdom power. (John 21:22) “By inspiration [John]
came to be in the Lord’s day.” (Revelation 1:10)
When would that be?
A careful study of Bible prophecy reveals

JESUS SITS AT GOD’S RIGHT HAND
? SAUL BECOMES A DISCIPLE
? WE HAVE REASON TO REJOICE

138

that “the Lord’s day” began in modern times.
In 1914, what became known as World War I
broke out. And the decades since then have
been marked by more wars, plagues, starvation, earthquakes, and other evidences marking
a large-scale ful?llment of “the sign” that Jesus
gave his apostles about his “presence” and “the
end.” (Matthew 24:3, 7, 8, 14) The preaching of
the good news of the Kingdom is now being
done, not just in the area of the Roman Empire,
but globally.
John was inspired to describe what this
means: “Now have come to pass the salvation
and the power and the Kingdom of our God and
the authority of his Christ.” (Revelation 12:10)
Yes, the Kingdom of God in heaven, which Jesus so widely proclaimed, is a reality!
That is wonderful news for all loyal disciples
of Jesus. They can take to heart John’s words:
“On this account be glad, you heavens and you
who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for
the sea, because the Devil has come down to
you, having great anger, knowing that he has a
short period of time.”—Revelation 12:12.
Thus, Jesus is no longer sitting at his Father’s right hand waiting. He is ruling as King,
and soon he will eliminate all his enemies. (Hebrews 10:12, 13) What exciting developments
then await us?

 After Jesus ascended to heaven, what did he do?
 When did “the Lord’s day” begin, and what took place thereafter?
 Why do we have good reason to rejoice?
313

JESUS BRINGS PARADISE AND FINISHES HIS ASSIGNMENT
1 CORINTHIANS 15:24-28

Soon after Jesus’ baptism, he faced an enemy who was determined to cause him to fail
even before he began his ministry. Yes, the Devil tried repeatedly to tempt Jesus. Later, Jesus
said about that evil one: “The ruler of the world
is coming, and he has no hold on me.”—John
14:30.
The apostle John foresaw in vision what lay
ahead for ‘the great dragon, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan.’ That vicious enemy of mankind would be cast out
of heaven, “having great anger, knowing that
he has a short period of time.” (Revelation 12:
9, 12) Christians have good reason to believe
that they are living during that “short period of
time” and that soon “the dragon, the original
serpent,” will be abyssed and inactive for 1,000
years while Jesus rules in God’s Kingdom.—Revelation 20:1, 2.
During that period, what will occur on earth,
our home? Who will live here, and under what
conditions? Jesus himself pointed to the answers. In his illustration of the sheep and the
goats, he showed what future awaits righteous humans who are like sheep, who cooperate with and do good toward Jesus’ brothers. He also made clear what lies ahead for
those who do the opposite, those who are like
goats. Jesus said: “These [the goats] will depart into everlasting cutting-o?, but the righteous ones [the sheep] into everlasting life.”
—Matthew 25:46.
This helps us to understand Jesus’ words to
the criminal who was on the stake beside him.
Jesus did not hold out to that man the reward
that was promised to his faithful apostles, that
of being part of the Kingdom of the heavens.
Rather, Jesus promised the repentant evildoer:
314

?

?

THE OUTCOME FOR THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS
? MANY WILL ENJOY PARADISE ON EARTH
JESUS PROVES TO BE THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE

139

“Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.” (Luke 23:43) Thus that man gained the
prospect of living in Paradise—a beautiful park,
or parklike garden. Logically, those today who
prove to be like sheep and who enter “into everlasting life” will also be in that Paradise.
This harmonizes with the description that the
apostle John gave of conditions that will then
prevail on earth. He said: “The tent of God is
with mankind, and he will reside with them, and
they will be his people. And God himself will be
with them. And he will wipe out every tear from
their eyes, and death will be no more, neither
will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
In order for that criminal to enjoy life in Paradise, he will have to be raised from the dead.
And he will not be alone in experiencing a resurrection. Jesus made that clear when he said:
“The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out,
those who did good things to a resurrection of
life, and those who practiced vile things to a
resurrection of judgment.”—John 5:28, 29.
But what of the faithful apostles and the limited number of others who will be with Jesus in
heaven? The Bible says: “They will be priests
of God and of the Christ, and they will rule as
kings with him for the 1,000 years.” (Revelation

20:6) These who become corulers with Christ
will have been men and women on earth. So
they will certainly be compassionate and understanding heavenly rulers over those on earth.
—Revelation 5:10.
Jesus will apply his ransom sacri?ce to humans on earth and lift from them the curse of
inherited sin. He and his corulers will raise faithful mankind to perfection. Yes, humans will then
enjoy the life that God originally purposed for
them when he told Adam and Eve to multiply
and ?ll the earth. Even death that resulted from
Adam’s sin will be no more!
Thus, Jesus will have accomplished all that
Jehovah asked of him. At the end of his Thousand Year Rule, Jesus will hand over the Kingdom and the perfected human family to his Father. Regarding this marvelous act of humility
on Jesus’ part, the apostle Paul wrote: “When
all things will have been subjected to him, then
the Son himself will also subject himself to the
One who subjected all things to him, that God
may be all things to everyone.”—1 Corinthians
15:28.
Clearly, Jesus plays a vital role in accomplishing God’s glorious purposes. And as those purposes continue to unfold throughout eternity,
he will live up completely to the description he
gave of himself: “I am the way and the truth and
the life.”—John 14:6.

 What does the future hold for mankind’s great enemy, the Devil?
 Who will be able to enjoy Paradise, and under what conditions?
 By the end of the thousand years, what will Jesus have accomplished, and what will he then do?
316

TO IMITATE JESUS, BE. . .
COMPASSIONATE

FORGIVING

As a perfect man, Jesus did not experience many of the distresses and concerns
that other humans did. Yet he showed
deep feeling for people. He was willing
to go out of his way for them, to do
things beyond what might have seemed
necessary. Yes, compassion moved him
to help others. Re?ect on the examples
in Chapters 32, 37, 57, 99.

Jesus did more than teach about the
need to be forgiving—he demonstrated
forgiveness in dealing with his disciples
and others. Meditate on examples found
in Chapters 26, 40, 64, 85, 131.

APPROACHABLE
People of all ages—young and old—felt
that they could approach Jesus because
he did not have an air of aloofness or
superiority. Sensing Jesus’ personal interest in them, people felt at ease in his
presence. To note this, see Chapters 25,
27, 95.

PRAYERFUL
Jesus regularly turned to his Father in
earnest prayer, privately and when with
true worshippers. He prayed on many
occasions, not only at mealtimes. He
prayed to thank his Father, to praise him,
and to seek his direction before making
serious decisions. Consider the examples
found in Chapters 24, 34, 91, 122, 123.

UNSELFISH
At times when he could have bene?ted
from some needed rest and relaxation,
Jesus still put himself out for others. He
did not have a me-?rst attitude. In this
too, he provided a model that we can
follow closely. Study how that model is
re?ected in Chapters 19, 41, 52.

ZEALOUS
It was foretold that most Jews would
refuse to accept the Messiah and that his
enemies would kill him. So Jesus could
easily have been self-sparing in what he
did for people. Instead, he zealously
promoted true worship. He set an example of zeal for all his followers who face
indi?erence or even opposition. See
Chapters 16, 72, 103.

HUMBLE
Jesus was superior to imperfect humans
in countless ways, such as in knowledge
and wisdom. His perfection undoubtedly
gave him physical and mental abilities
beyond what anyone around him had.
Yet he humbly served others. You will
?nd lessons about this in Chapters 10, 62,
66, 94, 116.

PATIENT
Jesus consistently showed patience with
his apostles and others when they failed
to imitate his example or apply what he
said. He patiently repeated lessons that
they needed so that they could draw
closer to Jehovah. Re?ect on examples
of Jesus’ patience in Chapters 74, 98,
118, 135.

SCRIPTURE INDEX
MATTHEW
1:18-25
2:1-12
2:13-23
3:1-12
3:13-17
4:1-11
4:12
4:13-22
4:23-25
5:1–7:29
8:1-4
8:5-13
8:14-17
8:18
8:19-22
8:23-27
8:28-34
9:1-8
9:9-13
9:14-17
9:18-22
9:18, 23-26
9:27-34
9:35–10:15
10:16–11:1
11:2-15
11:16-30
12:1-8
12:9-14
12:15-21
12:22-32
12:33-50
13:1-53
13:54-58
13:55, 56
14:1-12
14:13-21
14:22-36
15:1-20
15:21-31
15:32–16:12
16:13-27
16:28–17:13
17:14-20
17:22–18:5
18:6-20

4
7
8
11
12
13
18
22
24
35
25
36
23
44
65
44
45
26
27
28
46
47
48
49
50
38
39
31
32
33
41
42
43
48
9
51
52
53
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

Numbers after the citations indicate chapters.

18:21-35
19:1-15
19:16-30
20:1-16
20:17-28
20:29-34
21:1-11
21:12, 13
21:14-17
21:18, 19
21:19-27
21:28-46
22:1-14
22:15-40
22:41–23:24
23:25–24:2
24:3-51
25:1-13
25:14-30
25:31-46
26:1-5
26:6-13
26:14-19
26:20
26:21-29
26:30
26:31-35
26:36-46
26:47-56
26:57-68
26:69-75
27:1-11
27:12-14
27:15-17
27:18, 19
27:20-30
27:31, 32
27:33-44
27:45-56
27:57–28:2
28:3-15
28:16-20

64
95
96
97
98
99
102
103
102
103
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
101
115
116
117
123
118
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
137

MARK
1:1-8
1:9-11
1:12, 13

11
12
13

1:14, 15
1:16-20
1:21-34
1:35-39
1:40-45
2:1-12
2:13-17
2:18-22
2:23-28
3:1-6
3:7-12
3:13-19
3:19-30
3:31-35
4:1-34
4:35-41
5:1-20
5:21-34
5:22-24
5:35-43
6:1-6
6:3
6:6-11
6:12, 13
6:14-29
6:17-20
6:30-44
6:45-56
7:1-23
7:24-37
8:1-21
8:22-38
9:1-13
9:14-29
9:30-37
9:38-50
10:1-16
10:17-31
10:32-45
10:46-52
11:1-11
11:12-18
11:19-33
12:1-12
12:13-34
12:35-40
12:41–13:2

20
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
31
32
33
34
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
47
48
9
49
50
51
18
52
53
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
95
96
98
99
102
103
105
106
108
109
110

13:3-37
14:1, 2
14:3-9
14:10-16
14:17
14:18-25
14:26
14:27-31
14:32-42
14:43-52
14:53-65
14:66-72
15:1
15:2-5
15:6-19
15:20, 21
15:22-32
15:33-41
15:42–16:4
16:5-8

111
115
101
115
116
117
123
118
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134

LUKE
1:5-33
1:34-56
1:56
1:57-79
2:1-20
2:21-39
2:40-52
3:1-18
3:19, 20
3:21, 22
4:1-13
4:14, 15
4:16-31
4:31-41
4:42, 43
5:1-11
5:12-16
5:17-26
5:27-32
5:33-39
6:1-5
6:6-11
6:12-16
6:17-49
7:1-10

1
2
4
3
5
6
10
11
18
12
13
20
21
23
24
22
25
26
27
28
31
32
34
35
36

7:11-17
7:18-30
7:31-35
7:36-50
8:1-3
8:4-18
8:19-21
8:22-25
8:26-39
8:40-48
8:40-42
8:49-56
9:1-5
9:6
9:7-9
9:10-17
9:18-26
9:27-36
9:37-43
9:43-48
9:49, 50
9:51-62
10:1-24
10:25-37
10:38–11:13
11:14-36
11:37-54
12:1-34
12:35-59
13:1-21
13:22–14:6
14:7-24
14:25-35
15:1-10
15:11-32
16:1-13
16:14-31
17:1-10
17:11-19
17:20-37
18:1-14
18:15-17
18:18-30
18:31-34
18:35–19:10
19:11-28
19:29-44

37
38
39
40
41
43
42
44
45
46
47
47
49
50
51
52
59
60
61
62
63
65
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
92
93
94
95
96
98
99
100
102

19:45-48
20:1-8
20:9-19
20:20-40
20:41-47
21:1-6
21:7-38
22:1-13
22:14-18
22:19-23
22:24-38
22:39-46
22:47-53
22:54
22:54-62
22:63-65
22:66–23:3

103
105
106
108
109
110
111
115
116
117
118
123
124
125
126
125
127

23:4-16
23:18-25
23:24-31
23:32-43
23:44-49
23:50–24:3
24:4-12
24:13-49
24:50-52

128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
137

JOHN
1:6-8, 15-28
1:29-51
1:32-34
2:1-12
2:12-22
2:23–3:21

11
14
12
15
16
17

3:22–4:3
4:3-43
4:43-54
5:1-16
5:17-47
6:1-13
6:14-25
6:25-48
6:48-71
7:1
7:2-10
7:11-32
7:32-52
8:12-36
8:37-59
9:1-18
9:19-41

INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS (PARABLES)
birds and lilies
building a tower
camel through needle’s eye
children in marketplace
choosing most prominent place
cultivators kill owner’s son
denarius paid to workers
drachma found
dragnet
faithful and discreet slave
faithful steward
father’s willingness to give
?g tree
Fine Shepherd
?shers of men
foundation of house
grain of wheat dies,
then produces
hen gathers her chicks
house built on rock
inviting the poor to a feast
king cancels a large debt
king considering battle
king’s marriage feast
leaven mixed in ?our
leaven of the Pharisees
lost drachma
lost sheep

35
84
96
39
83
106
97
85
43
111
78
35
79
80
22
35
103
110
35
83
64
84
107
43
58
85
63

18
19
20
29
30
52
53
54
55
56
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

10:1-21
10:22-42
11:1-16
11:17-37
11:38-54
11:55–12:11
12:12-19
12:20-27
12:28-50
13:1-17
13:18-30
13:31-38
14:1-31
15:1-27
16:1-33
17:1-26
18:1

80
81
89
90
91
101
102
103
104
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123

18:2-12
18:13, 14
18:15-18
18:19-24
18:25-27
18:28-35
18:36-38
18:39–19:5
19:6-17
19:17-24
19:25-30
19:31–20:1
20:2-18
20:19-29
21:1-25

124
125
126
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136

Numbers indicate chapters.

meal invitations declined
83
minas
100
murderous cultivators
106
mustard grain, faith
89
mustard grain, Kingdom
43
narrow gate
35
needle’s eye
96
neighborly Samaritan
73
new wine, old wineskins
28
pearl of high value
43
pearls before swine
35
persistent friend
74
prodigal son
86
putting hand to plow
65
rich man and Lazarus
88
rich man who built storehouses
77
salt of the earth
35
seeds on various soils
43
sewing new cloth on old garment 28
sheep and goats
114
slave coming in from ?eld
89
slaves watching for
master’s return
78
son who was lost
86
sower
43
sower who sleeps
43
strain out gnat, swallow camel 109
straw in brother’s eye
35

talents
tax collector and Pharisee
ten virgins
treasure hidden in ?eld
true vine
two children sent to vineyard
two debtors
unclean spirit returns
unforgiving slave
unrighteous steward
wheat and weeds
widow and judge
workers in the vineyard

113
94
112
43
120
106
40
42
64
87
43
94
97

INDEX OF BOXES
“The Time Came
for Purifying Them”
Joyful Trips
Who Were the Samaritans?
Demon Possession
Illustrations About Fasting
Teaching by Repetition
His Sweat Is as Drops of Blood
The Field of Blood
Scourging
“To the Stake”

6
10
19
23
28
35
123
127
129
132

SOME MESSIANIC PROPHECIES
EVENT

PROPHECY

FULFILLMENT

CHAPTER

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Born in Bethlehem

Micah 5:2

Luke 2:1-6

5, 7, 67

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Flight to and return from Egypt

Hosea 11:1

Matthew 2:13-15, 19, 20

8

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Mothers weep after their sons die in
the attempt to kill young Jesus

Jeremiah 31:15

Matthew 2:17, 18

8

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Proclaims liberty to captives

Isaiah 61:1, 2

Luke 4:17-21

21

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Resides in Capernaum of Galilee

Isaiah 9:1, 2

Matthew 4:13-17

22, 67

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Cures many who are sick

Isaiah 53:4

Matthew 8:16, 17

23

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Does not quarrel on the streets

Isaiah 42:1-4

Matthew 12:16-21

33

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Teaches by means of illustrations

Psalm 78:2; Isaiah 6:9, 10

Matthew 13:13-15, 34, 35

43

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Enters Jerusalem riding on a colt

Zechariah 9:9

Matthew 21:1-9

102

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Many do not believe in him

Isaiah 6:10; 53:1

John 12:37, 38

104

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Trusted companion betrays him

Psalm 41:9

John 13:18, 21

117

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Disciples scatter, abandoning him

Zechariah 13:7

Matthew 26:31, 54-56

118, 124

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Hated without cause

Psalm 35:19; 69:4

John 15:24, 25

120

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Soldiers divide up his garments

Psalm 22:18

John 19:23, 24

131

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Thirsty while on the stake

Psalm 22:15

John 19:28

132

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

His body pierced after his death

Zechariah 12:10

John 19:34, 37

133

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Bones not broken before he dies

Psalm 34:20

John 19:36

133

______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

For more information, visit www.jw.org or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.

