God’s Kingdom Rules!
Large-Print Edition

krlp-E
160510

s

God’s Kingdom Rules!
Large-Print Edition

This book is the property of

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible
educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
God’s Kingdom Rules!—Large Print
January 2016 Printing
English (krlp-E)
? 2015
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

A LETTER FROM
THE GOVERNING BODY
Dear Fellow Kingdom Publisher:
PICTURE yourself as a member of the Brooklyn
Bethel family on Friday morning, October 2, 1914.
You are seated at your usual place at the breakfast
table, awaiting the arrival of Brother C. T. Russell.
Suddenly the door to the dining room opens and
Brother Russell appears. He pauses for a moment, as
is his custom, and greets the Bethel family with a
cheery “Good morning, all.” But then, instead of immediately taking his place at the head of the table,
he claps his hands and makes a thrilling announcement: “The Gentile Times have ended; their kings
have had their day!” You can hardly contain your joy
—you have been looking forward to this moment for
a long time! Along with the rest of the Bethel family, you greet this exciting news with sustained, enthusiastic applause.
Many decades have passed since Brother Russell
made that electrifying statement. What has the Kingdom accomplished since then? A great deal! Through

the Kingdom arrangement, Jehovah has been progressively re?ning and training his people—from
just a few thousand in 1914 to more than seven-anda-half million today. How many ways have you personally bene?ted from such training?
Today we often hear our brothers say, “Jehovah’s celestial chariot is on the move!” and that is true. However, the fact is that since 1914, the celestial chariot,
depicting the invisible part of Jehovah’s organization, has been moving at an extremely brisk pace,
as a careful reading of this publication will demonstrate. With a view to getting the good news
preached worldwide, Kingdom publishers have used
a variety of innovative methods, including newspapers, information marches, picture presentations,
testimony cards, phonographs, radio, and even the
Internet.
With Jehovah’s blessing on the work, we are now
able to publish our attractive Bible literature in
more than 670 languages and to o?er it to everyone
without charge. Self-sacri?cing volunteers assist in
the construction of Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls,
and branch facilities, both in prosperous lands and

in lands with limited resources. And when disaster
strikes, loving brothers and sisters rush to the aid of
those in the a?ected areas, proving that they truly
are “born for times of distress.”—Prov. 17:17.
At times, the clergy and other opposers frame
“trouble in the name of the law,” but it is faithstrengthening to see how, time and again, their misguided e?orts have turned out to be “for the advancement of the good news.”—Ps. 94:20; Phil. 1:12.
It is an honor for us to be associated with you, our
fellow “domestics.” Please know that we love all of
you very much. It is our prayer that the contents of
this publication will help you to appreciate your spiritual heritage as never before.—Matt. 24:45.
With every good wish, we are
Your brothers,

Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

CONTENTS
SECTION

1
2

CHAPTER

1.

“Let Your Kingdom Come”

2.

The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven

PAGE

8
20

Kingdom Truth—Dispensing Spiritual Food
3.

Jehovah Reveals His Purpose

53

4.

Jehovah Exalts His Name

67

5.

The King Shines Light on the Kingdom

85

Kingdom Preaching—Spreading the Good
News Worldwide
6.

People Who Preach—Ministers
O?er Themselves Willingly

103

7.

Methods of Preaching—Using Every
Means to Reach People

118

8.

Tools for Preaching—Producing
Literature for the Worldwide Field

135

9.

Results of Preaching—“The Fields
. . . Are White for Harvesting”

153

3

4

5

Kingdom Standards—Seeking God’s
Righteousness
10.

The King Re?nes His People
Spiritually

175

11.

Moral Re?nements—Re?ecting
God’s Holiness

191

12.

Organized to Serve “the God
of Peace”

210

Kingdom Conquests—Legally Establishing
the Good News
13.

Kingdom Preachers Take Their
Case to Court

237

14.

Loyally Supporting God’s
Government and No Other

265

15.

Fighting for Freedom to Worship

283

Kingdom Education—Training Servants of
the King
16.

Meeting Together for Worship

307

17.

Training Ministers of the Kingdom

329

6

7

Kingdom Support—Building for Worship and
Providing Relief
18.

How Kingdom Activities Are Financed 349

19.

Building Work That Honors Jehovah

364

20.

The Ministry of Relief

378

Kingdom Promises—Making All Things New
21.

God’s Kingdom Removes Its Enemies 399

22.

The Kingdom Carries Out God’s
Will on Earth

415

1

“Let Your Kingdom Come”

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Examine what Jesus taught about God’s Kingdom

IF Jehovah God himself directed you to do something, how would you respond? No matter what he
asked, would you not be eager to heed his direction?
Surely you would!
2

Sometime after the Passover of 32 C.E., three of

Jesus’ apostles—Peter, James, and John—had just
such an experience. (Read Matthew 17:1-5.) Gathered
with their Master on “a lofty mountain,” they saw in
vision a preview of Jesus as a glorious heavenly
King. The vision seemed so real that Peter tried to
take part in it. While Peter was speaking, a cloud
formed over them. Then Peter and his associates
plainly heard what only a handful of humans have
ever been privileged to hear—Jehovah’s own voice.
After a?rming that Jesus was his Son, Jehovah said
pointedly: “Listen to him.” The apostles heeded that
1, 2. What words did Jehovah himself speak in the hearing of three
of Jesus’ apostles, and how did they respond?
8

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

divine direction. They listened to what Jesus taught,
and they urged others to do the same.—Acts 3:19-23;
4:18-20.
3

Those words—“Listen to him”—were recorded

in the Bible for our bene?t. (Rom. 15:4) Why? Because Jesus is Jehovah’s spokesman and every time
Jesus opened his mouth to teach, he shared what his
Father wanted us to know. (John 1:1, 14) Since Jesus
spoke more about God’s Kingdom, the heavenly
Messianic government made up of Christ Jesus and
his 144,000 corulers, than he did about any other
subject, we do well to examine this vital subject carefully. (Rev. 5:9, 10; 14:1-3; 20:6) First, though, let us
examine why Jesus said so much about God’s Kingdom.
4

“Out of the Abundance of the Heart . . .”
The Kingdom is close to Jesus’ heart. Why can

we say that? Because words are a window into the
heart—that is, our words reveal what is truly important to us. Jesus himself said: “Out of the abundance
3. Why does Jehovah want us to listen to his Son, and what subject do
we thus do well to examine?
4. How did Jesus indicate that the Kingdom is close to his heart?
“LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”

9

of the heart the mouth speaks.” (Matt. 12:34) At
every opportunity, Jesus opened his mouth to speak
about the Kingdom. There are over 100 references
to the Kingdom in the four Gospels, most of them
in statements made by Jesus. He made the Kingdom
the theme of his preaching, saying: “I must also declare the good news of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because for this I was sent.” (Luke 4:43)
Even after his resurrection, Jesus continued to speak
about the Kingdom to his disciples. (Acts 1:3) Surely Jesus’ heart over?owed with appreciation for the
Kingdom, impelling him to speak about it.
The Kingdom is close to Jehovah’s heart as well.
How do we know that? Remember, Jehovah sent his
only-begotten Son into the world; Jehovah is the
source of everything that his Son said and taught.
(John 7:16; 12:49, 50) Jehovah is also the source of
everything that is recorded in the four Gospel accounts of Jesus’ life and ministry. Consider for a moment what that means.
5

6

Imagine that you are putting together a family

5-7. (a) How do we know that the Kingdom is close to Jehovah’s
heart? Illustrate. (b) How can we show that the Kingdom is close to
our heart?
10

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

photo album. You have many photographs to choose
from, but the album can hold only so many. What
do you do? You choose which ones to include. In a
sense, the Gospels are like a photo album that gives
us a clear picture of Jesus. Jehovah did not inspire
the Gospel writers to record everything that Jesus
said and did while on earth. (John 20:30; 21:25) Instead, Jehovah’s spirit guided them in recording the
words and deeds that help us to understand the purpose of Jesus’ ministry and what is most important
to Jehovah. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17; 2 Pet. 1:21) Since the
Gospels are ?lled with Jesus’ teachings about God’s
Kingdom, we may safely conclude that the Kingdom is close to Jehovah’s heart. Just think—Jehovah
wants us to know what his Kingdom is all about!
Each of us does well to ask, ‘Is God’s Kingdom
close to my heart?’ If it is, we will be eager to listen
to what Jesus said and taught about that Kingdom
—its importance and how and when it will come.
7

“Let Your Kingdom Come”—How?
8 Consider the model prayer. With eloquent simplicity, Jesus summed up the importance of the
8. How did Jesus sum up the importance of the Kingdom?
“LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”

11

Kingdom, showing what it will accomplish. That
prayer consists of seven petitions. The ?rst three
concern Jehovah’s purposes—the sancti?cation of
his name, the coming of his Kingdom, and the carrying out of his will on earth as in heaven. (Read
Matthew 6:9, 10.) Those three petitions are closely related. The Messianic Kingdom is the instrument
through which Jehovah will sanctify his name and
carry out his will.
9

How will God’s Kingdom come? When we pray,

“Let your Kingdom come,” we are asking that the
Kingdom take decisive action. When the Kingdom
comes, it will exert its full power toward the earth.
It will remove the present wicked system of things,
including all man-made governments, and bring in a
righteous new world. (Dan. 2:44; 2 Pet. 3:13) Then,
under Kingdom rule, the entire earth will become a
paradise. (Luke 23:43) Those in God’s memory will
be brought back to life and reunited with their loved
ones. (John 5:28, 29) Obedient humans will reach
perfection and enjoy endless life. (Rev. 21:3-5) At
9, 10. (a) How will God’s Kingdom come? (b) What Bible promise
do you long to see ful?lled?
12

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

last, earth will be in perfect harmony with heaven,
re?ecting the will of Jehovah God! Do you not long
to see those Bible promises come true? Remember
that every time you pray for God’s Kingdom to
come, you are praying for those precious promises to
be ful?lled.
10

It is clear that God’s Kingdom has not yet

“come” to ful?ll the model prayer. After all, manmade governments are still ruling and the righteous
new world is not yet here. But there is good news.
God’s Kingdom has been established, as we will discuss in the next chapter. Let us now examine what
Jesus said as to when the Kingdom would be established and when it would come.

11

When Would
God’s Kingdom B e Established?
Jesus indicated that the Kingdom would not be

established in the ?rst century C.E., despite the expectations of some of his disciples. (Acts 1:6) Consider what he said in two di?erent parables given
less than two years apart.
11. What did Jesus indicate about the establishment of God’s Kingdom?
“LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”

13

12

The parable of the wheat and the weeds. (Read Matthew 13:24-30.) After relating this parable, perhaps in
the spring of 31 C.E., Jesus explained it to his disciples. (Matt. 13:36-43) Here is the gist of the parable
and its meaning: Following the death of the apostles,
the Devil would sow weeds (imitation Christians) in
among wheat (“sons of the Kingdom,” or anointed
Christians). Both the wheat and the weeds would be
allowed to grow together during a growing season
that would continue until the harvest, which is “a
conclusion of a system of things.” After the beginning of the harvest season, the weeds would be collected. Then, the wheat would be gathered. The
parable thus indicates that the Kingdom would be
established, not in the ?rst century C.E., but only after the growing season ended. As matters worked
out, the growing season ended and the harvest season began in 1914.
The parable of the minas. (Read Luke 19:11-13.) Jesus gave this parable in 33 C.E. on his way to Jeru13

12. How does the parable of the wheat and the weeds indicate that the
Kingdom was not established in the ?rst century C.E.?
13. How did Jesus illustrate that he would not be installed as Messianic King immediately after his return to heaven?
14

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

salem for the last time. Some of his listeners thought
that he would set up his Kingdom as soon as they arrived in Jerusalem. To correct that notion and to
show that the establishment of the Kingdom was yet
a long way o?, Jesus compared himself to “a man of
noble birth” who had to travel “to a distant land to
secure kingly power.”1[1] In Jesus’ case, the “distant
land” was heaven, where he would receive power as
King from his Father. But Jesus knew that he would
not be installed as Messianic King immediately after
his return to heaven. Instead, he would sit at God’s
right hand and wait until the appointed time. As it
turned out, that wait lasted for many centuries.—Ps.
110:1, 2; Matt. 22:43, 44; Heb. 10:12, 13.
When Will God’s Kingdom Come?
14 A few days before Jesus was put to death, four
of his apostles asked him: “What will be the sign of
1[1] Jesus’ parable may well have reminded his listeners of Archelaus, a son of Herod the Great. Before Herod died, he designated
Archelaus as heir to rulership over Judea and other areas. However, before he could begin ruling, Archelaus ?rst had to make the
long journey to Rome in order to secure the approval of Augustus
Caesar.

14. (a) How did Jesus answer the question that four of his apostles
asked him? (b) What does the ful?llment of Jesus’ prophecy tell us
about his presence and the Kingdom?
“LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”

15

your presence and of the conclusion of the system of
things?” (Matt. 24:3; Mark 13:4) Jesus answered by
relating the extensive prophecy that is recorded in
Matthew chapters 24 and 25. Jesus detailed various
global events that would serve as a sign identifying
a time period called his “presence.” The start of his
presence would coincide with the establishment of
the Kingdom; and the culmination of his presence,
with the coming of the Kingdom. We have ample
proof that Jesus’ prophecy has been undergoing ful?llment since 1914.1[2] Hence, that year marked the
start of his presence and the establishment of the
Kingdom.
15

When, though, will God’s Kingdom ?nally

come? Jesus did not reveal exactly when that would
happen. (Matt. 24:36) But he did say something that
should assure us that it is very near indeed. Jesus indicated that the Kingdom would come after “this
generation” witnessed the ful?llment of the prophetic sign. (Read Matthew 24:32-34.) To whom does the
1[2] For more information, see chapter 9 of the book What Does
the Bible Really Teach?

15, 16. To whom do the words “this generation” refer?
16

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

expression “this generation” refer? Let us take a closer look at Jesus’ words.
16 “This generation.” Did Jesus have in mind unbelievers? No. Consider his audience. Jesus related
this prophecy to a few apostles who had “approached
him privately.” (Matt. 24:3) The apostles would soon
be anointed with holy spirit. Note also the context.
Before he spoke about “this generation,” Jesus said:
“Now learn this illustration from the ?g tree: Just as
soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts
its leaves, you know that summer is near. Likewise
also you, when you see all these things, know that he
is near at the doors.” Jesus’ anointed followers—not
unbelievers—would see the things he foretold and
would discern their signi?cance, namely, that Jesus
“is near at the doors.” Therefore, when Jesus spoke
of “this generation,” he had in mind his anointed followers.
17 “Will by no means pass away until all these things
happen.” How will those words prove true? To answer
that, we need to know two things: the meaning both
of “generation” and of “all these things.” The term
17. What is the meaning of the expressions “generation” and “all
these things”?
“LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”

17

“generation” often refers to people of varying ages
whose lives overlap during a particular period of
time. A generation is not overly long, and it comes
to an end. (Ex. 1:6) The expression “all these things”
includes all the foretold events during Jesus’ presence, from its beginning in 1914 until its culmination
at the “great tribulation.”—Matt. 24:21.
18

How, then, may we understand Jesus’ words

about “this generation”? The generation consists of
two overlapping groups of anointed ones—the ?rst
is made up of anointed ones who saw the beginning
of the ful?llment of the sign in 1914 and the second,
anointed ones who for a time were contemporaries
of the ?rst group. At least some of those in the second group will live to see the beginning of the
coming tribulation. The two groups form one generation because their lives as anointed Christians
overlapped for a time.1[3]
1[3] Anyone who was anointed after the death of the last of the
anointed ones in the ?rst group—that is, after those who witnessed
the “beginning of pangs of distress” in 1914—would not be part of
“this generation.”—Matt. 24:8.

18, 19. How may we understand Jesus’ words about “this generation,” and what may we conclude?
18

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

19

What may we conclude? Well, we know that the

sign of Jesus’ presence in Kingdom power is clearly evident around the globe. We also see that the
anointed ones who are still alive and part of “this
generation” are getting on in years; yet, they will not
all die o? before the great tribulation begins. Therefore, we can conclude that very soon indeed God’s
Kingdom will come and exercise its rule over the
earth! How thrilling it will be to witness the ful?llment of the prayer that Jesus taught us: “Let your
Kingdom come”!
20

Let us never forget the words that Jehovah him-

self spoke from heaven regarding his Son: “Listen to
him.” As true Christians, we are eager to heed that
divine direction. We are keenly interested in everything that Jesus said and taught about God’s Kingdom. What that Kingdom has already accomplished
and will do in the future is the vital ?eld of study
that will be discussed in this publication. The next
chapter will examine the exciting developments that
surrounded the birth of God’s Kingdom in heaven.
20. What vital ?eld of study will be discussed in this publication, and
what will be examined in the next chapter?
“LET YOUR KINGDOM COME”

19

2

The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

How God’s people were prepared for the birth
of the Kingdom

DO YOU ever wonder what it might have been like
to live during some great turning point in history?
Many do. But consider: If you had lived in such a
momentous time, would you have personally witnessed the key events that brought about change?
Perhaps not. Events that spell doom for old regimes
and ?ll the pages of history books often take place
out of the public eye. In a sense, much of history unfolds behind closed doors—in throne rooms, in private council chambers, or in government o?ces.
Nonetheless, such changes a?ect millions of lives.
2 What about the greatest event ever to occur in
the history of the world? That event has touched millions of lives. Yet, it took place out of human view.
We refer, of course, to the birth in heaven of God’s
Kingdom, the long-promised Messianic government
1, 2. What was the greatest event ever to occur in world history, and
why is it not surprising that it went unseen by human eyes?
20

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

that will soon bring this whole world system to its
end. (Read Daniel 2:34, 35, 44, 45.) Since humans did
not witness that momentous birth, should we conclude that Jehovah hid the event from mankind? Or,
rather, did he prepare his loyal people for it beforehand? Let us see.
“My Messenger . . . Will Clear Up a Way B efore Me”
3 From ancient times, Jehovah purposed to prepare his people for the birth of the Messianic Kingdom. For instance, consider the prophecy of Malachi
3:1: “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will
clear up a way before me. And suddenly the true
Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in
whom you take delight.”
In the modern-day ful?llment, when did Jehovah,
“the true Lord,” come to inspect those who were
serving in the earthly courtyard of his spiritual temple? The prophecy explains that Jehovah would come
with “the messenger of the covenant.” Who was
that? None other than the Messianic King, Jesus
4

3-5. (a) Who was “the messenger of the covenant” mentioned at Malachi 3:1? (b) What would happen before “the messenger of the
covenant” would come to the temple?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

21

Christ! (Luke 1:68-73) As the newly installed Ruler,
he would inspect and re?ne God’s people on earth.
—1 Pet. 4:17.
5

Who, though, was the other “messenger,” the

?rst one mentioned at Malachi 3:1? This prophetic
?gure would be on the scene well before the Messianic King’s presence. In the decades before 1914, did
anyone “clear up a way” before the Messianic King?
6

Throughout this publication, we will ?nd an-

swers to such questions in the thrilling history of Jehovah’s modern-day people. This history shows that
in the latter part of the 19th century, one small
group of faithful people was emerging as the only
body of genuine Christians in a vast ?eld of imitations. That group came to be known as the Bible Students. Those taking the lead among them
—Charles T. Russell and his close associates—did,
indeed, act as the foretold “messenger,” giving spiritual direction to God’s people and preparing them
for the events ahead. Let us consider four ways in
which the “messenger” did so.
6. Who acted as the foretold “messenger” that came ?rst to prepare
God’s people for the events ahead?
22

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

7

Worshipping in Truth
Those Bible Students studied prayerfully; they agreed

on, collected together, and published clear doctrinal
truths. For centuries, the world of Christendom had
been enveloped in spiritual darkness; many of its
teachings were rooted in paganism. A prime example is the doctrine of the immortality of the soul.
During the 1800’s, though, a few sincere students of
the Bible scrutinized that teaching and saw that it
had no support in God’s Word. Henry Grew, George
Stetson, and George Storrs wrote and lectured boldly, exposing that satanic lie.1[1] Their work, in turn,
had a profound impact on C. T. Russell and his close
associates.
8

The little group of Bible Students found that

other doctrines linked to the immortality of the soul
were likewise confusing and false—for example, the
teaching that all good people go to heaven or that
God torments the immortal souls of the wicked in
1[1] To learn more about Grew, Stetson, and Storrs, see the book
Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom, pages 45-46.

7, 8. (a) During the 1800’s, who began to expose the falseness of the
immortality of the soul doctrine? (b) C. T. Russell and his close associates exposed what other teachings as false?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

23

eternal hell?re. Russell and his close associates boldly exposed those lies in numerous articles, books,
pamphlets, tracts, and published sermons.
9

Likewise, the Bible Students exposed as false the

widely revered Trinity doctrine. In 1887, Zion’s Watch
Tower remarked: “The Scriptures are very clear concerning the distinct individuality and exact relationship of Jehovah and our Lord Jesus.” The article
then noted how amazing it was that “the idea of a
triune God—three Gods in one, and at the same
time, one God in three—should ever have gained
prominence and general acceptance. But the fact
that it is so, only goes to show how soundly the
church slept while the enemy bound her in the
chains of error.”
10

As its full title suggested, the journal Zion’s

Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence was deeply concerned with prophecies pertaining to Christ’s
presence. The faithful anointed writers who contributed to that journal saw that Daniel’s prophecy regarding the “seven times” had a bearing on the tim9. How did Zion’s Watch Tower expose as false the Trinity doctrine?
10. How did the Watch Tower point to 1914 as a marked year?
24

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ing of the ful?llment of God’s purposes regarding
the Messianic Kingdom. As early as the 1870’s, they
pointed to 1914 as the year when those seven times
would end. (Dan. 4:25; Luke 21:24) Although our
brothers of that era did not yet grasp the full significance of that marked year, they proclaimed what
they knew far and wide, with long-lasting e?ects.
Neither Russell nor his faithful associates
claimed credit for uncovering and grasping those vital spiritual truths. Russell gave much credit to others who had come before him. Above all, he gave
credit to Jehovah God, the one responsible for teaching His people what they need to know when they
need to know it. Clearly, Jehovah did bless the efforts of Russell and his associates to sift out truth
from falsehood. As the years passed, they stood ever
more apart and distinct from Christendom.
11

The work those faithful men did in championing doctrinal truth in the decades before 1914 was
simply amazing! Looking back, The Watch Tower and
Herald of Christ’s Presence of November 1, 1917,
12

11, 12. (a) To whom did Brother Russell give credit for what he
taught? (b) How important was the work carried out by Russell and his
associates in the decades prior to 1914?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

25

commented: “Millions of people today ?nd themselves free from the burden of fear, imposed upon
them by the teachings of hell ?re and other false
doctrines . . . The tide of Truth, which began more
than forty years ago, is still steadily rising and will
continue to rise until it ?lls the whole earth; and its
opponents might as well try to sweep back with an
ordinary broom the waves of a mighty ocean as to
prevent the Truth from spreading throughout the
earth.”
Consider this: Would people have been prepared
for the beginning of Christ’s presence if they were
not able to distinguish Jesus from his Father, Jehovah? Surely not! Nor would they have been prepared
if they thought that immortality was the automatic
possession of all and not a precious gift bestowed on
only relatively few of Christ’s footstep followers; nor
if they thought that God tormented people in hell?re for all eternity with no hope of relief! Without
doubt, the “messenger” prepared the way for the
Messianic King!
13

13, 14. (a) How did the “messenger” help to prepare the way for the
Messianic King? (b) What can we learn from our brothers of more than
a century ago?
26

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

And what about us today? What can we learn
from our brothers of more than a century ago? We
likewise need to be avid readers and students of
God’s Word. (John 17:3) As this materialistic world
becomes emaciated, spiritually speaking, may our appetite for spiritual food grow ever stronger!—Read
1 Timothy 4:15.
14

“Get Out of Her, My People”
15 The Bible Students taught that it was necessary to
break away from worldly churches. In 1879, the Watch
Tower referred to the “Babylon church.” Was it talking about the papacy? The Roman Catholic Church?
Protestant denominations had for centuries made
such applications of Babylon as a prophetic type
in Scripture. However, the Bible Students gradually came to the realization that all the churches of Christendom were included in modern-day
“Babylon.” Why? Because they all taught doctrinal
lies such as those discussed above.1[2] In time, our
1[2] Although the Bible Students saw the need to withdraw from
religious organizations that were friends of the world, for years
they continued to view as Christian brothers individuals who, although not Bible Students, professed belief in the ransom and
claimed to be dedicated to God.

15. The Bible Students gradually came to what realization? (See also
footnote.)
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

27

publications became more and more direct about
what honesthearted members of Babylon’s churches
should do.
For example, in 1891, Volume III of Millennial
Dawn discussed God’s rejection of modern-day Babylon and noted: “The whole system—a system of systems—is rejected.” It added that all those “not in
sympathy with her false doctrines and practices are
now called to separate themselves from her.”
16

In January 1900, the Watch Tower o?ered counsel to those who still kept their names on the denominational rolls of Christendom’s churches and who
rationalized their course, saying, “My sympathies are
all with the truth, and I rarely attend other meetings.” The article asked: “But is this right—to be half
out and half in Babylon? Is this the obedience required . . . and pleasing and acceptable to God? Surely not. He [the church member] publicly entered into
a covenant with the denomination when he joined it,
and he should faithfully live up to all the conditions
of that covenant until he . . . publicly renounces or
17

16, 17. (a) How did Volume III of Millennial Dawn and the Watch
Tower urge people to remove themselves from false religion? (b) What
factor diluted such early warnings? (See footnote.)
28

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

cancels his membership.” Over the years, that message became stronger.1[3] Servants of Jehovah must
renounce all ties with false religion.
If such warnings to get out of Babylon the Great
had not been sounded regularly, would Christ as the
newly installed King have had a body of prepared,
anointed servants on earth? Surely not, for only
Christians who are free from Babylon’s grip can worship Jehovah “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:24) Are
we today likewise determined to keep free from false
religion? Let us keep obeying the command: “Get
out of her, my people”!—Read Revelation 18:4.
18

Gathering for Worship
19 The Bible Students taught that fellow believers should
gather together for worship, where that was possible. For
genuine Christians, it is not enough to get out of
1[3] One factor that diluted the force of such early warnings
was that they were applied mainly to Christ’s little ?ock of 144,000. We will see in Chapter 5 that prior to 1935, it was thought
that the “great multitude,” as described at Revelation 7:9, 10 in
the King James Version, would include countless members of the
churches of Christendom and that they would be made a secondary heavenly class as a reward for siding with Christ at the very
end.

18. Why was it necessary for people to get out of Babylon the Great?
19, 20. How did the Watch Tower encourage God’s people to gather
together for worship?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

29

false religion. It is vital to take part in pure worship
as well. From its early issues, the Watch Tower encouraged readers to gather together for worship. For
example, in July 1880, Brother Russell reported on
a speaking tour he had made, commenting on how
encouraging the many meetings had been. He then
urged readers to send in cards regarding their progress—some of which would be published in the journal’s pages. To what end? “Let us all know . . . how
the Lord prospers you; whether you keep up your
meetings with those of like precious faith.”
In 1882, an article called “Assembling Together”
appeared in the Watch Tower. The article exhorted
Christians to hold meetings “for mutual edi?cation,
encouragement and strengthening.” It noted: “It matters not whether there is any one learned or talented among you. Let each one bring his own Bible, paper, and pencil, and avail yourselves of as many
helps in the way of a Concordance, . . . as possible.
Choose your subject; ask for the Spirit’s guidance in
the understanding of it; then read, think, compare
scripture with scripture and you will assuredly be
guided into truth.”
20

30

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

The Bible Students had their headquarters in
Allegheny, Pennsylvania, U.S.A. There they set a
?ne example by gathering together in obedience to
the inspired counsel recorded at Hebrews 10:24, 25.
(Read.) Much later, an elderly brother named Charles
Capen recalled attending those meetings as a boy. He
wrote: “I still remember one of the scripture texts
painted on the wall of the Society’s assembly hall.
‘One is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are
brethren.’ That text has always stood out in my mind
—there is no clergy-laity distinction among Jehovah’s people.” (Matt. 23:8) Brother Capen also recalled the stimulating meetings, the warm encouragement, and Brother Russell’s diligent e?orts to
shepherd every member of the congregation personally.
21

Faithful people responded to this example and
to the instruction given. Congregations formed in
other states, such as Ohio and Michigan, and then
all over North America and in other lands. Consider:
22

21. The congregation in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, set what example
regarding meetings and shepherding?
22. How did faithful people respond to the encouragement to attend
Christian meetings, and what lesson may we learn from them?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

31

Would faithful people have truly been prepared for
the presence of Christ if they had not been trained
to obey the inspired counsel to meet together for
worship? Surely not! What about us today? We need
to be just as determined to attend Christian meetings faithfully, seeking every opportunity to worship
together and be spiritually upbuilding to one another.
Zealous Preaching
23 The Bible Students taught that all the anointed must
be preachers of the truth. In 1885, the Watch Tower commented: “We should not forget that every member of
the anointed body is anointed to preach (Isa. 61:1),
called to the ministry.” An 1888 issue contained this
exhortation: “Our commission is plain . . . If we ignore it and excuse ourselves, we are certainly slothful servants, proving our unworthiness of the high
position to which we are called.”
24

Brother Russell and his close associates did

23. How did the Watch Tower make it plain that all anointed ones must
be preachers of the truth?
24, 25. (a) How did Russell and his close associates do more than encourage people to preach? (b) How did one colporteur describe his work
in the “preautomobile days”?
32

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

more than encourage people to preach. They also began to produce tracts called Bible Students’ Tracts,
which were later also called Old Theology Quarterly.
Readers of the Watch Tower received these to distribute to the public without charge.
25

Those who devoted themselves to the ministry

full-time were called colporteurs. Charles Capen,
mentioned earlier, was among them. He later recalled: “I used maps made by the United States Government Geological Survey to guide my covering the
territory in Pennsylvania. These maps showed all the
roads, making it possible to reach all sections of each
county on foot. Sometimes after a three-day trip
through the country taking orders for the books in
the Studies in the Scriptures series, I would hire a
horse and buggy so that I could make the deliveries.
I often stopped and stayed overnight with farmers.
Those were the preautomobile days.”
26

Such early e?orts at preaching certainly re-

quired courage and zeal. Would true Christians have
26. (a) Why did God’s people need to engage in the preaching work
in order to be prepared for Christ’s reign? (b) What questions do we
do well to ask ourselves?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

33

been prepared for Christ’s reign if they had not been
taught the importance of the preaching work? Assuredly not! After all, that work was to become an
outstanding feature of Christ’s presence. (Matt. 24:
14) God’s people had to be prepared to make that
lifesaving work the central feature of their lives. We
today do well to ask ourselves: ‘Is the preaching work
central to my life? Do I make sacri?ces in order to
have a full share in that activity?’
27

God’s Kingdom Is B orn!
Finally, the momentous year 1914 arrived. As we

discussed at the outset of this chapter, there were no
human eyewitnesses to the glorious events in heaven. However, the apostle John was given a vision
that described matters in symbolic terms. Imagine
this: John witnesses “a great sign” in heaven. God’s
“woman”—his organization of spirit creatures in
heaven—is pregnant and gives birth to a male child.
This symbolic child, we are told, is soon to “shepherd all the nations with an iron rod.” Upon its
birth, though, the child is “snatched away to God
27, 28. What did the apostle John witness in vision, and how did Satan and his demons react to the birth of the Kingdom?
34

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

and to his throne.” A loud voice in heaven says:
“Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of
his Christ.”—Rev. 12:1, 5, 10.
28

Without doubt, John saw in vision the birth of

the Messianic Kingdom. That event was surely a glorious one, but it did not please everyone. Satan and
his demons warred against the faithful angels, who
were under the leadership of Michael, or Christ. The
outcome? We read: “Down the great dragon was
hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and
Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth;
he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were
hurled down with him.”—Rev. 12:7, 9.
29

Long before 1914, the Bible Students said that a

time of trouble would begin in that marked year. But
even they could not have imagined how accurate that
prediction would turn out to be. As John’s vision revealed, Satan would then begin to have an even
greater impact on human society: “Woe for the earth
and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to
29, 30. Following the birth of the Messianic Kingdom, how did conditions change (a) on earth? (b) in heaven?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

35

you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short
period of time.” (Rev. 12:12) In 1914, the ?rst world
war broke out and the sign of Christ’s presence
in kingly power began to see global ful?llment.
The “last days” of this system of things had begun.
—2 Tim. 3:1.
However, there was joy in heaven. Satan and his
demons were banished forever. John’s account reads:
30

“On this account be glad, you heavens and you
who reside in them!” (Rev. 12:12) With the heavens
cleansed and Jesus enthroned as King, the Messianic Kingdom was now poised to act in behalf of God’s
people on earth. What action would it take? As we
saw at the outset of this chapter, Christ as “the messenger of the covenant” would ?rst act as a re?ner
of God’s servants here on earth. What would that
mean?
31

A T ime of Testing
Malachi foretold that the re?ning process would

not be easy. He wrote: “Who will endure the day of
his coming, and who will be able to stand when he
31. What did Malachi foretell about the period of re?ning, and how
did that prophecy begin to see ful?llment? (See also the footnote.)
36

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

appears? For he will be like the ?re of a re?ner and
like the lye of laundrymen.” (Mal. 3:2) How true
those words proved to be! Beginning in 1914, God’s
people on earth faced a succession of major tests
and hardships. As World War I raged, many Bible
Students experienced vicious persecution and imprisonment.1[4]
From within, the organization su?ered turmoil
as well. In 1916, Brother Russell died at only 64 years
of age, leaving many of God’s people in shock. His
death revealed that some had been placing too much
emphasis on one exemplary man. Though Brother
Russell wanted no such reverence, a measure of
creature worship had grown up around him. Many
thought that the progressive revelation of truth had
ended with his death, and some bitterly resisted efforts to move forward. That attitude contributed to
an outbreak of apostasy that divided the organization.
32

1[4] In September 1920, The Golden Age (now Awake!) published a
special issue detailing numerous instances of wartime persecution
—some of it shockingly brutal—in Canada, England, Germany, and
the United States. In contrast, the decades prior to the ?rst world
war saw very little persecution of that kind.

32. What internal turmoil a?icted God’s people following 1916?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

37

33

Unful?lled expectations were another test.

Though the Watch Tower had rightly pointed to 1914
as the year when the Gentile Times would end, the
brothers did not yet understand what would take
place in that year. (Luke 21:24) They thought that in
1914, Christ would take his anointed bride class to
heaven to rule with him there. Those hopes were not
realized. Late in 1917, The Watch Tower announced
that a 40-year harvest period would end in the spring
of 1918. But the preaching work did not end. It continued to prosper after that date passed. The magazine suggested that the harvest had indeed ended
but that a period of gleaning remained. Still, many
stopped serving Jehovah because of disappointment.
34

A daunting test arose in 1918. J. F. Rutherford,

who succeeded C. T. Russell in taking the lead
among God’s people, was arrested along with seven
other responsible brothers. They were unjustly sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in the federal
penitentiary in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A. For a time,
33. How did unful?lled expectations test God’s people?
34. What daunting test arose in 1918, and why did Christendom think
that God’s people were “dead”?
38

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

the work of God’s people may have seemed paralyzed. Many among the clergy of Christendom rejoiced. They assumed that with the “leaders” imprisoned, the headquarters in Brooklyn closed up, and
the preaching work under attack in America and Europe, those pestilent Bible Students were “dead”—no
longer a threat. (Rev. 11:3, 7-10) How wrong they
were!
35

A T ime of Revival!
Little did the enemies of the truth know that Je-

sus allowed these hardships to a?ict his people only
because Jehovah was then sitting “as a re?ner and
cleanser of silver.” (Mal. 3:3) Jehovah and his Son
were sure that the faithful ones would emerge from
those ?ery tests re?ned, puri?ed, and better suited
than ever for service to the King. From early in 1919,
it became clear that God’s spirit had done what the
enemies of his people thought impossible. The faithful ones were revived! (Rev. 11:11) At that time,
Christ evidently ful?lled a key feature of the sign of
35. Why did Jesus allow hardships to a?ict his followers, and what
action did he take to help them?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

39

the last days. He appointed “the faithful and discreet
slave,” a small group of anointed men who would
take the lead among his people by dispensing spiritual food at the proper time.—Matt. 24:45-47.
Brother Rutherford and his associates were released from prison on March 26, 1919. A convention
was soon scheduled for that September. Plans got
under way to start up a second journal, to be called
The Golden Age. A companion to The Watch Tower, it
was designed for use in the ?eld ministry.1[5] The
same year saw the publication of the ?rst issue of
the Bulletin, which is now the meeting workbook for
Our Christian Life and Ministry. From the start, it
has always been a stimulus to the ?eld ministry.
Without a doubt, from 1919 onward the personal,
house-to-house ministry came increasingly to the
fore.
36

The preaching work continued to re?ne Christ’s
servants, for the proud and arrogant among them
had no stomach for such humble work. Those who
37

1[5] For many years The Watch Tower was intended mainly for
members of the little ?ock for their personal edi?cation.

36. What showed that God’s people were reviving spiritually?
37. In the years after 1919, how did some prove disloyal?
40

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

would not get in step with the work parted company with the faithful ones. In the years following 1919,
some disloyal ones were embittered and resorted to
slander and libel, even siding with the persecutors of
Jehovah’s faithful servants.
38

Despite such attacks, though, Christ’s followers

on earth continued to thrive and to prosper spiritually. Their every success, their every victory since
then, furnishes us with convincing proof that God’s
Kingdom rules! Only by God’s active support and
blessing—which he provides through his Son and the
Messianic Kingdom—could a group of mere imperfect humans win victory after victory over Satan and
this wicked system of things!—Read Isaiah 54:17.
39

In the chapters that follow, we will examine

what God’s Kingdom has accomplished on earth in
the century since it was born in heaven. Each section of this book will cover a distinct aspect of the
Kingdom work here on earth. In each chapter, a
38. What do the successes and victories of Christ’s followers on earth
furnish for us?
39, 40. (a) What are some of the features of this publication?
(b) What can studying this book do for you?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

41

review box will help us individually to determine just
how real the Kingdom is to us. In the concluding
chapters, we will discuss what to expect when the
Kingdom comes in the near future to destroy the
wicked and usher in a paradise earth. What will
studying this publication do for you?
Satan wants to erode your faith in God’s Kingdom. But Jehovah wants to strengthen your faith so
that it will protect you and keep you strong. (Eph.
6:16) Therefore, we urge you to study this publication prayerfully. Keep asking yourself, ‘Is God’s
Kingdom real to me?’ The more real it is to you now,
the more likely it is that you will be on hand, faithfully and actively supporting that Kingdom, on the
day when everyone alive will see that God’s Kingdom is real and that it is ruling!
40

42

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? Who helped to prepare Jesus’ true followers
for the birth of the Kingdom?
? In what ways were true Christians prepared
for the rule of God’s Kingdom?
? What features mark the Kingdom as a
real government? (See the box “God’s
Kingdom—A Real Government.”)
? How can you imitate Christ’s faithful
followers of a century ago as you support the
Kingdom today?
THE KINGDOM IS BORN IN HEAVEN

43

G OD’S K INGD OM
A REAL GOVERNMENT

Is God’s Kingdom a real government? Consider just a
few of the features of God’s Kingdom. Ask yourself,
‘Does not each feature show that the Kingdom is just as
real as—and far superior to—any human government on
earth today?’

A RULER
Enthroned in 1914, Jesus Christ is a powerful, just,
wise, and merciful King who is humble before Jehovah
God. (Isa. 9:6, 7; 11:1-3) Unlike imperfect human
rulers, he cannot be corrupted, nor is he hampered by
fractious congresses and parliaments or self-seeking
lobbyists and special-interest groups.
LEGISLATIVE AND JUDICIAL P OWERS
Jesus’ life and example while on earth form the basis
for a perfect law, “the law of the Christ.”—Gal. 6:2;
1 Pet. 2:21.
Jehovah has entrusted all judging to his Son, and Jesus
carries out that assignment perfectly, as no human
judge ever could.—John 5:22.
44

A B ODY OF ADMINISTRATORS
Jesus has 144,000 corulers who will share in administering his just reign over the earth. A key objective of his
rule is to reconcile humans to God, so his corulers will
also serve as priests for that purpose.—Rev. 14:1; 20:6.
AN ARMY
As Leader of Jehovah’s vast army of mighty angels,
Jesus commands the most powerful military force ever
to exist. It will soon wage war on all wickedness.
—Ps. 45:1, 3-5; Rev. 19:11, 14-16.
A S E AT O F G OV E R N M EN T
Jesus’ throne is in heaven, at the side of his Father.
Heaven is Jehovah’s “lofty abode of holiness and glory.”
(Isa. 63:15) Is it a real place? Yes, more so than any
capital city or government building you can see, for
heavenly things do not decay.—Matt. 6:20.
A T E R R I TO RY O N E A RT H
Today, Jesus’ subjects are like foreigners who live as
law-abiding citizens in every land and nation. But
Jehovah has provided a spiritual land for them, a realm
of activity in which they carry out the King’s will.
45

(Isa. 60:2; 66:8) Soon, Jesus’ Kingdom will claim the
entire earth as its physical territory.—Ps. 72:8.
G OVERNMENT PRO GRAMS
God’s Kingdom will soon ful?ll God’s promises to
provide all these blessings and more.—Ps. 72:16;
Isa. 2:3; 33:24; 35:6; 65:21.
HEALTH
HOUSING
NOURISHMENT
EDUCATION
EMPLOYMENT
A P OPULATION OF LOYAL SUBJECTS
“A ruler without subjects is ruined,” explains the Bible,
whereas “a multitude of people are a king’s majesty.”
(Prov. 14:28) The Kingdom’s population of loyal
subjects has surged in number to well over seven and a
half million.—Ps. 72:8; Isa. 60:22.

46

P R E PA R E D F O R

THE BIRTH OF THE KINGD OM
Consider some historical events from the decades leading up to 1914. Can you see how these developments
helped God’s people to be prepared for the birth of the
Messianic Kingdom?

Mid-1800’s
Henry Grew, George Stetson, and George Storrs
scrutinize and expose the falseness of the doctrine of the
immortality of the human soul
1868 or 1869
Charles T. Russell begins a careful examination of
the doctrines of Christendom’s churches and ?nds
misinterpretations of the Scriptures; Russell’s “wavering
faith” is reestablished after he hears a sermon by
Adventist preacher Jonas Wendell
1870
Brother Russell forms a Bible study group; they begin a
systematic study of the Bible
1870-1875
Truths regarding the soul, the ransom, and the manner
of Christ’s return become clearer
47

1876
An article by C. T. Russell, published in the
Bible Examiner, points to 1914 as the end of the
Gentile Times
1877
The Object and Manner of Our Lord’s Return is
published to clarify truths regarding Christ’s presence
1879
The ?rst issue of Zion’s Watch Tower and Herald of
Christ’s Presence is published
Babylon the Great is recognized as being associated with
the nominal churches of Christendom
1880
Brother Russell tours the northeastern United States to
visit and strengthen study groups
1881
Multipage tracts (some over 100 pages long) are
published and provided to Watch Tower readers for free
public distribution
The Watch Tower invites all readers to commemorate the
Memorial in Allegheny, Pennsylvania
Colporteur work begins
48

Articles such as “Wanted 1,000 Preachers” and
“Anointed to Preach” promote the ministry
Christians who are not yet doing so are encouraged to
begin holding meetings regularly
1882
An article refuting the Trinity doctrine is published
1885
Watch Tower publications reach readers on ?ve
continents
1886
The Divine Plan of the Ages is released, the ?rst volume
of the series of books later known as Studies in the
Scriptures
The Watch Tower invites readers to a three-day “general
meeting” to follow the Memorial of Christ’s death, thus
beginning the practice of holding annual conventions
1889
The Bible House is built in Allegheny, Pennsylvania
1890
The Watch Tower Society publishes Rotherham’s New
Testament, using a secular printing company
49

1891
C. T. Russell begins extensive tours outside the United
States, seeking ways of “forwarding the spread of the
Truth”
1894
Tower Tract Society representatives, acting as traveling
overseers, are sent out to visit and encourage
congregations
1895
The Watch Tower notes that some faithful ones are
holding “Dawn Circles” for Bible study and recommends
“the holding of these Circles everywhere”
1896
C. T. Russell publishes the booklet What Say the
Scriptures About Hell?
1900
First branch o?ce established in London, England
Preaching work reaches 28 countries
1903
Distribution of free tracts on Sundays, which had
taken place on streets near churches, shifts to intense
house-to-house campaigns
50

Russell’s sermons begin to appear regularly in
newspapers
1909
The headquarters of the Watch Tower Society moves to
Brooklyn, New York
1910
The Bible Students begin to use the name International
Bible Students Association
1911-1912
C. T. Russell and six companions travel some
35,000 miles on a round-the-world tour to investigate the
“status and prospects of Christianity” in various lands,
including China, India, Japan, and the Philippines
1914
The “Photo-Drama of Creation” is ?rst shown in New
York on January 11, then in ?ve other cities within the
next month. By the end of the year, it is seen in various
forms by close to 9,000,000 people in North America,
Europe, Australia, and New Zealand
In October, C. T. Russell announces to the Bethel family:
“The Gentile times have ended; their kings have had
their day.” According to a sister in attendance, he added:
“So we know not what awaits us”
51

SECTION 1

K INGD OM T RUTH
Dispensing Spiritual Food
YOU see your Bible student’s eyes light up as he grasps the
meaning of the scripture you have just read together. Slowly, he says, “Do you mean that the Bible teaches that we
can live in Paradise forever—right here on this earth?”
Your companion in the ministry smiles and says, “Well,
what did you see in the Bible?” Overwhelmed, the student
shakes his head in wonderment, saying, “I just can’t believe
that I was never taught this before!” You recall that he said
something similar just a few weeks ago when he learned
for the ?rst time that God’s name is Jehovah.
Have you ever had such an experience? Many of God’s people have. Few things can so vividly remind us of the precious gift we have been given—the knowledge of the truth!
Stop and think: How did that gift come to you? In this section we will examine that question. The way that God’s
people have progressively received spiritual enlightenment
is a vivid proof that God’s Kingdom is real. For a century,
its King, Jesus Christ, has been actively ensuring that
God’s people are taught the truth.

3

Jehovah Reveals His Purpose

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Jehovah progressively reveals understanding of his purpose,
but only to those who fear him

CARING parents include their children in discussions about family matters. They are discreet, however, about the amount of information that they
share. They reveal only details that they feel their
children are mature enough to absorb.
2

Similarly, Jehovah has progressively revealed his

purpose for the human family. But he has done so
only when he knew that the time was right. Consider a brief overview of how Jehovah has revealed
truths about the Kingdom throughout history.
3

Why the Need for the Kingdom?
Originally, the Messianic Kingdom was not part

of Jehovah’s purpose. Why not? Because Jehovah did
not predestinate the path of human history; after all,
he created humans with free will. Thus, he told
1, 2. How has Jehovah revealed his purpose for mankind?
3, 4. Did Jehovah predestinate the path of human history? Explain.
JEHOVAH REVEALS HIS PURPOSE

53

Adam and Eve his purpose for mankind, stating: “Be
fruitful and become many, ?ll the earth and subdue
it.” (Gen. 1:28) Jehovah also required that they respect his standards of good and bad. (Gen. 2:16, 17)
Adam and Eve could have chosen to remain loyal. If
they and their descendants had done so, we would
not need the Kingdom ruled by Christ to ful?ll
God’s purpose. Right now, the globe would be teeming with perfect people, all worshipping Jehovah.
The rebellion of Satan, Adam, and Eve did not
cause Jehovah to abandon his purpose to ?ll the
earth with a perfect human family. Instead, Jehovah
adapted his method of ful?lling it. His purpose is
not like a train that must run on a certain track to
reach its destination and can be derailed by the actions of others. Once Jehovah states his purpose, no
force in the universe can prevent its ful?llment.
(Read Isaiah 55:11.) If a challenge threatens to block
one track, Jehovah uses another.1[1] (Ex. 3:14, 15)
When he sees ?t, he informs his loyal servants of the
new method he will use to accomplish his purpose.
4

1[1] God’s name is a form of the Hebrew verb meaning “to become.” Jehovah’s name implies that he is the Ful?ller of his
promises. See the box “The Meaning of God’s Name,” on page 73.
54

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

In response to the rebellion in Eden, Jehovah
purposed to set up the Kingdom. (Matt. 25:34) At
that dark point in human history, Jehovah began to
shed light on the instrument that he would use to restore mankind and undo the hurt caused by Satan’s
futile grab for power. (Gen. 3:14-19) Even so, Jehovah did not disclose details about the Kingdom all
at once.
5

Jehovah B egins to Reveal Truths About the Kingdom
6 With the very ?rst prophecy, Jehovah promised
that a certain “o?spring” would crush the serpent.
(Read Genesis 3:15.) However, the identities of that
o?spring and the o?spring of the serpent were not
revealed at that time. In fact, Jehovah did not shed
more light on such details for some 2,000 years.1[2]
7

Eventually, Jehovah chose Abraham as the one

1[2] Although this amount of time may seem extensive today, we
must remember that human life spans used to be much longer;
there were only four lifespans that overlapped from Adam to Abraham. Adam’s life overlapped the life of Lamech, Noah’s father.
Lamech’s life overlapped that of Shem, Noah’s son. Shem’s life
overlapped that of Abraham.—Gen. 5:5, 31; 9:29; 11:10, 11; 25:7.

5. How did Jehovah respond to the rebellion in Eden?
6. What did Jehovah promise, but what did he not reveal?
7. Why was Abraham chosen, and what key lesson do we learn from
this?
JEHOVAH REVEALS HIS PURPOSE

55

through whom the promised o?spring would come.
Abraham was chosen because he “listened to [Jehovah’s] voice.” (Gen. 22:18) We learn a key lesson
from that fact—Jehovah reveals his purpose only to
those who have a reverential fear of him.—Read
Psalm 25:14.
8

When speaking to his friend Abraham through

an angel, Jehovah for the ?rst time revealed this vital fact about the promised o?spring: He would be
human. (Gen. 22:15-17; Jas. 2:23) But how would this
human crush the serpent? Who was the serpent? Later revelations would shed light on those questions.
9

Jehovah determined that the promised o?spring

would come through Abraham’s grandson Jacob, a
man who displayed great faith in God. (Gen. 28:1322) By means of Jacob, Jehovah disclosed that the
Promised One would be a descendant of Jacob’s son
Judah. Jacob prophesied that this descendant of Judah would receive a “scepter,” a rod symbolizing royal authority, and that to this one ‘the obedience of
the peoples would belong.’ (Gen. 49:1, 10) With that
8, 9. What facts about the promised o?spring did Jehovah reveal to
Abraham and Jacob?
56

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

pronouncement, Jehovah indicated that the Promised One would become a ruler, a king.
10 Some 650 years after Judah’s day, Jehovah revealed more about his purpose to King David, a descendant of Judah. Jehovah described David as “a
man agreeable to his heart.” (1 Sam. 13:14; 17:12;
Acts 13:22) Because David had a reverential fear of
God, Jehovah chose to make a covenant with him,
promising him that one of his descendants would
rule forever.—2 Sam. 7:8, 12-16.
11 About 500 years later, Jehovah used the prophet
Daniel to disclose the exact year when this Anointed One, or Messiah, would appear on earth. (Dan. 9:
25) Jehovah considered Daniel to be “someone very
precious.” Why? Because Daniel deeply respected Jehovah and served him continually.—Dan. 6:16; 9:
22, 23.
12 Even though Jehovah used such faithful prophets as Daniel to record dozens of details about the
promised o?spring, the Messiah, it was not yet Jehovah’s time for his servants to understand the full signi?cance of what he inspired them to write. For
10, 11. Why did Jehovah reveal his purpose to David and Daniel?
12. What was Daniel told to do, and why?
JEHOVAH REVEALS HIS PURPOSE

57

example, after being given a vision involving the establishment of God’s Kingdom, Daniel was told to
seal up the prophecy until the time appointed by Jehovah. At that future time, true knowledge would
“become abundant.”—Dan. 12:4.
Jesus Sheds Light on God’s Purpose
13 Jehovah clearly identi?ed Jesus as the promised
o?spring, the descendant of David who would rule
as King. (Luke 1:30-33; 3:21, 22) When Jesus began
his ministry, it was as if the sun rose on mankind’s
knowledge about God’s purpose. (Matt. 4:13-17) For
instance, Jesus removed any doubt about the identity of “the serpent” mentioned at Genesis 3:14, 15,
calling the Devil “a murderer” and “the father of the
lie.” (John 8:44) In the revelation that he gave to
John, Jesus identi?ed “the original serpent” as “the
one called Devil and Satan.”1[3] (Read Revelation 1:1;
1[3] The term “Satan,” when used to identify an individual, appears 18 times in the Hebrew Scriptures. However, “Satan” appears
more than 30 times in the Christian Greek Scriptures. Appropriately, the Hebrew Scriptures did not give undue emphasis to Satan
but focused on identifying the Messiah. When the Messiah arrived,
he exposed Satan fully, a fact recorded in the Christian Greek
Scriptures.

13. (a) Who was the promised o?spring? (b) How did Jesus shed light
on the prophecy recorded at Genesis 3:15?
58

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

12:9.) In that same revelation, Jesus showed how
he—the promised o?spring—will ?nally ful?ll the
prophecy given in Eden and crush Satan out of existence.—Rev. 20:7-10.
14

As we saw in Chapter 1 of this book, Jesus

spoke extensively about the Kingdom. However, he
did not always disclose all the details his disciples
wanted to know. Even when he provided speci?c details, it was not until later—sometimes many centuries later—that followers of Christ began to discern
the full signi?cance of the truths their Master had
revealed. Consider some examples.
15

In 33 C.E., Jesus made it clearly known that the

corulers who would assist the King of God’s Kingdom would be taken from the earth and raised
to life as spirit creatures in heaven. His disciples,
though, did not immediately understand this revelation. (Dan. 7:18; John 14:2-5) In that same year, Jesus indicated by means of illustrations that the Kingdom would not be established until a long time after
he ascended to heaven. (Matt. 25:14, 19; Luke 19:11,
14-16. Did the ?rst-century disciples always discern the full significance of the truths Jesus revealed? Explain.
JEHOVAH REVEALS HIS PURPOSE

59

12) The disciples did not comprehend this vital
point and later asked the resurrected Jesus: “Are you
restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?” Jesus,
however, chose not to reveal any more details at that
time. (Acts 1:6, 7) Jesus also taught that there would
be “other sheep,” who would not be part of the “little ?ock” of his corulers. (John 10:16; Luke 12:32)
Followers of Christ did not properly understand the
identity of those two groups until well after the
Kingdom was established in 1914.
About 1711 B.C.E.
Judah
J E H O VA H P R O G R E S S I V E L Y
Promise given
REVEALS HIS PURP O SE
Jacob that the o?spring
Born 1858 B.C.E. will be a king
4000 B.C.E.

3000 B.C.E.

4026 B.C.E.
Adam created
Later, Jehovah
promises an
o?spring that will
crush the serpent

60

2000 B.C.E.

1943 B.C.E.
Abraham
The o?spring
will be a
human
descendant of
Abraham

1000 B.C.E.

About 1070 B.C.E.
David
The o?spring will
be a descendant
of King David and
will rule forever

16

Jesus could have told his disciples many things

while with them on earth, but he knew that they
were not able to bear them. (John 16:12) Without a
doubt, much knowledge about the Kingdom was revealed in the ?rst century. However, that was not yet
the time for such knowledge to become abundant.

17

True Knowledge B ecomes Abundant
in “the T ime of the End”
Jehovah promised Daniel that during “the time

of the end,” many would “rove about, and the true
knowledge” of God’s purpose would become abundant. (Dan. 12:4) Those who want that knowledge
17. What must we do to understand truths about the Kingdom, but
what is also needed?

B.C.E. / C.E.

About 539 B.C.E.
Daniel
Jehovah uses the
prophet Daniel to
disclose the exact year
when the o?spring, or
Messiah, will appear
on earth

1000 C.E.

33 C.E.
Jesus
Jesus reveals that the
corulers who will assist the
King of God’s Kingdom
will be taken from the earth
and raised to life as spirit
creatures in heaven

2000 C.E.

1914 C.E.
Time of the
End
Knowledge of
the Kingdom
begins to
become
abundant
61

must work hard to gain it. One reference work says
that a form of the Hebrew verb “rove about” conveys the idea of someone examining a book very
carefully and thoroughly. No matter how thoroughly we examine the Bible, though, we cannot properly understand truths about the Kingdom unless Jehovah grants us that privilege.—Read Matthew 13:11.
18

Just as Jehovah progressively revealed truths

about the Kingdom in the period leading up to 1914,
he continues to do so during the time of the end. As
Chapters 4 and 5 of this book will show, over the
past 100 years, God’s people have had to adjust their
understanding on a number of occasions. Does that
fact mean that they do not have Jehovah’s backing?
On the contrary! He supports them. Why? Because
those who fear Jehovah have displayed two qualities
that he loves—faith and humility. (Heb. 11:6; Jas.
4:6) Jehovah’s servants have faith that all the promises in God’s Word will come true. They show humility when they admit that they misunderstood exactly
how those promises would be ful?lled. That humble
18. How have those who fear Jehovah displayed faith and humility?
62

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

attitude is re?ected in the March 1, 1925, issue of
The Watch Tower, which said: “We know that the Lord
is his own interpreter, that he will interpret his Word
to his people in his own good way and in his own
due time.”
When the Kingdom was established in 1914,
God’s people had only partial knowledge of how
prophecies relating to the Kingdom would be carried
out. (1 Cor. 13:9, 10, 12) In our zeal to see God’s
promises ful?lled, we have on occasion drawn wrong
conclusions. Over the years, the wisdom of another
statement made in The Watch Tower quoted in the
preceding paragraph has become apparent. The article stated: “It seems to be a safe rule to follow, that
prophecy can not be understood by us until it is ful?lled or in the course of ful?llment.” Now that we
are deep into the time of the end, many Kingdom
prophecies have been and are being ful?lled. Because God’s people are humble and willing to be corrected, Jehovah has allowed our understanding of his
purpose to become more complete. True knowledge
has become abundant!
19

19. What has Jehovah now allowed us to understand, and why?
JEHOVAH REVEALS HIS PURPOSE

63

Re?nements in Understanding Sift God’s People
20 When Jehovah re?nes our understanding of
truth, our heart condition is tested. Will faith and
humility move us to accept the changes? Christians
living in the middle of the ?rst century faced such a
test. For example, imagine that you were a Jewish
Christian living at that time. You deeply respect the
Mosaic Law and take pride in your national heritage.
Now you receive inspired letters from the apostle
Paul stating that the Law is no longer binding and
that Jehovah has rejected natural Israel in favor of
gathering a spiritual Israel made up of both Jews
and Gentiles. (Rom. 10:12; 11:17-24; Gal. 6:15, 16;
Col. 2:13, 14) How would you have responded?
21

Humble Christians accepted Paul’s inspired ex-

planation and were blessed by Jehovah. (Acts 13:48)
Others resented the re?nements and wanted to cling
to their own understanding. (Gal. 5:7-12) If they
would not change their viewpoint, those individuals
would lose the opportunity to be corulers with
Christ.—2 Pet. 2:1.
20, 21. How did re?nements in understanding a?ect ?rst-century
Christians?
64

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

In recent decades, Jehovah has re?ned our understanding of the Kingdom. For example, he has
helped us to see more clearly when those who will
be subjects of the Kingdom are to be separated
from unresponsive ones as sheep are separated from
goats. He has also taught us when the full number
of the 144,000 will be ?lled, what the Kingdom illustrations given by Jesus mean, and when the last of
the anointed will be raised to heavenly life.1[4] How
do you respond to such clari?cations? Is your faith
strengthened? Do you see them as evidence that Jehovah continues to educate his humble people? The
following material in this book will reinforce your
conviction that Jehovah is progressively revealing his
purpose to those who fear him.
22

1[4] For a discussion of some of these re?nements in understanding, see the following issues of The Watchtower: October 15, 1995,
pages 23-28; January 15, 2008, pages 20-24; July 15, 2008, pages 1721; July 15, 2013, pages 9-14.

22. How do you feel about clari?cations in our understanding of God’s
purpose?

JEHOVAH REVEALS HIS PURPOSE

65

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? Was the Messianic Kingdom part of God’s
original purpose? Explain.
? How did Jesus shed light on the Kingdom?
? What qualities must we cultivate if the
Kingdom is to remain real to us?

66

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

4

Jehovah Exalts His Name

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

God’s people give due prominence to the divine name

ON A cool but sunny Tuesday morning, December 2,
1947, a small group of anointed brothers from Bethel in Brooklyn, New York, set out to accomplish a
huge task. The work was exacting, but for the next
12 years, they kept at it. At long last, on Sunday,
March 13, 1960, they completed the ?nal text for
a new Bible translation. Three months later, on
June 18, 1960, Brother Nathan Knorr released the
?nal volume of the complete New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures to a thrilled convention audience in Manchester, England. The speaker well expressed the feelings of all in attendance when he exclaimed: ‘Today is a day for rejoicing on the part of
Jehovah’s Witnesses the wide world over!’ One outstanding feature of that new translation was a special cause for joy—the frequent use of God’s personal name.
1, 2. How does the New World Translation exalt God’s name?
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

67

Many translations of the Bible leave out God’s
name. But Jehovah’s anointed servants took a stand
against Satan’s scheme to blot the name of God out
of human memory. The introduction of the New
World Translation released that day stated: “The foremost feature of this translation is the restoration of
the divine name to its rightful place.” Indeed, the
New World Translation uses God’s personal name, Jehovah, more than 7,000 times. How outstandingly
this translation has exalted the name of our heavenly Father—Jehovah!
2

In earlier years, the Bible Students understood
God’s name to mean “I am that I am.” (Ex. 3:14, King
James Version) Thus, The Watch Tower of January 1,
1926, noted: “The name Jehovah signi?es the selfexisting One, . . . the One who had no beginning and
no end.” However, by the time the translators of the
New World Translation began their work, Jehovah had
helped his people to discern that his name signi?es
not merely that he is self-existent but foremost that
he is a God of purpose and activity. They learned
3

3. (a) What did our brothers discern about the meaning of God’s
name? (b) How should we understand Exodus 3:13, 14? (See the box
“The Meaning of God’s Name.”)
68

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

that the name Jehovah literally means “He Causes to
Become.” Yes, he caused the universe and intelligent
beings to come into existence, and he continues to
cause his will and purpose to become a reality. Why,
though, is it so important that God’s name be exalted, and how can we have a share in exalting it?
The S ancti?cation of God’s Name
4 Jehovah wants his name to be exalted. In fact,
his primary purpose is to sanctify his name, as is evident in Jesus’ ?rst request in his model prayer: “Let
your name be sancti?ed.” (Matt. 6:9) When making
that petition, for what are we praying?
5

As we learned in Chapter 1 of this publication,

the request “Let your name be sancti?ed” is one of
three petitions in Jesus’ model prayer that have
to do with Jehovah’s purpose. The other two are:
“Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place.”
(Matt. 6:10) Hence, just as we ask for Jehovah to
take action to cause his Kingdom to come and his
will to take place, so we ask for Jehovah to take action to sanctify his name. In other words, we are
4, 5. (a) For what do we ask when we pray: “Let your name be sancti?ed”? (b) How and when will God sanctify his name?
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

69

asking Jehovah to act to clear his name of all the reproach that has been heaped upon it since the rebellion in Eden. How will Jehovah respond to such
a prayer? He states: “I will certainly sanctify my
great name, which was profaned among the nations.”
(Ezek. 36:23; 38:23) At Armageddon, when he removes wickedness, Jehovah will sanctify his name
before the eyes of all creation.
Throughout history, Jehovah has allowed his servants to share in sanctifying his name. Of course, we
cannot make God’s name more sacred. It is already
sacred, or holy, in the absolute sense. So how can we
sanctify it? Isaiah states: “Jehovah of armies—he is
the One you should regard as holy.” And Jehovah
himself said concerning his people: “They will sanctify my name . . . , and they will stand in awe of the
God of Israel.” (Isa. 8:13; 29:23) Thus, we sanctify
God’s name by regarding it as separate from and
higher than all other names, by respecting what it
represents, and by helping others to regard it as holy.
We especially demonstrate our awe and reverence for
God’s name when we recognize Jehovah as our Rul6

6. How can we share in sanctifying God’s name?
70

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

er and obey him with all our heart.—Prov. 3:1; Rev.
4:11.
Prepared to B ear and Exalt God’s Name
7 God’s servants in modern times have used God’s
name in their publications since the 1870’s. For instance, Zion’s Watch Tower of August 1879 and Songs
of the Bride, a songbook published that same year,
mention the name Jehovah. Still, it seems that before Jehovah allowed his people to call themselves
publicly by his sacred name, he saw to it that they
met the requirements for that grand privilege. How
did Jehovah prepare those early Bible Students to
become bearers of his name?
In looking back at the late 1800’s and early
1900’s, we see how Jehovah gave his people a clearer understanding of important truths related to his
name. Let us consider three of these truths.
8

First, Jehovah’s servants came to have the proper
view of the importance of God’s name. Faithful early
9

7, 8. (a) Why did it take time before God’s people could bear his
name? (b) What will we now consider?
9, 10. (a) Why did early Watch Tower articles focus on Jesus?
(b) What change occurred from 1919 onward, and with what results?
(See also the box “How The Watchtower Has Exalted God’s Name.”)
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

71

Bible Students viewed the ransom arrangement as
the Bible’s main teaching. That explains why the
Watch Tower often focused on Jesus. For example, in
its ?rst year of publication, the magazine mentioned
the name Jesus ten times more than the name Jehovah. Regarding the Bible Students’ early years,
The Watchtower of March 15, 1976, noted that they
gave “overbalanced importance” to Jesus. In time,
though, Jehovah helped them to discern the prominence that the Bible gives to God’s personal name.
How did that a?ect the Bible Students? Especially
from 1919 onward, says the same Watchtower article,
“they began showing more appreciation for Messiah’s heavenly Father, Jehovah.” In fact, during the
decade following 1919, The Watch Tower mentioned
God’s name over 6,500 times!
By giving the name Jehovah proper recognition,
our brothers showed their love for God’s name. Like
Moses of old, they set out to “declare the name of
Jehovah.” (Deut. 32:3; Ps. 34:3) In turn, as promised
in the Scriptures, Jehovah took note of their love for
his name and showed them favor.—Ps. 119:132; Heb.
6:10.
10

72

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

THE MEANING OF G OD’S NAME
THE name Jehovah comes from a Hebrew verb that
means “to become.” Some scholars feel that in this instance the verb is used in its causative form. God’s
name is thus understood by many to mean “He Causes to Become.” This de?nition well ?ts Jehovah’s role
as the Creator. He caused the universe and intelligent
beings to come into existence and continues to cause
his will and purpose to become a reality.
How, then, should we understand Jehovah’s answer
to Moses’ question recorded at Exodus 3:13, 14? Moses asked: “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to
them, ‘The God of your forefathers has sent me to
you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is his name?’ What
should I say to them?” Jehovah answered: “I Will Become What I Choose to Become.”
Note that Moses was not asking Jehovah to reveal his name. Moses and the Israelites already knew
God’s name well. Moses wanted Jehovah to reveal
something faith-strengthening about the kind of God
he is, something that may also be re?ected in the
meaning of his name. Hence, by responding, “I Will
Become What I Choose to Become,” Jehovah was revealing a thrilling aspect of his own nature: In each
situation, he becomes whatever is necessary to ful?ll
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

73

his purpose. For example, for Moses and the Israelites, Jehovah became a Rescuer, a Lawgiver, a Provider—and much more. Thus, Jehovah himself chooses to
become whatever is necessary to ful?ll his promises to
his people. However, while the name Jehovah may include this idea, it is not limited to what he himself
chooses to become. It also includes what he causes
his creation to become in the accomplishment of his
purpose.1[1]
1[1] See appendix A4 in the revised New World Translation.
11

Second, true Christians acquired the right under-

standing of the work assigned by God. Shortly after
1919, the anointed brothers taking the lead were
moved to examine the prophecy of Isaiah. Thereafter, the contents of our publications underwent a
change in focus. Why did that adjustment prove to
be “food at the proper time”?—Matt. 24:45.
12

Before 1919, The Watch Tower had never dis-

cussed in any detail Isaiah’s statement: “ ‘You are my
witnesses,’ declares Jehovah, ‘yes, my servant whom
11, 12. (a) In what way did our publications change soon after 1919?
(b) To what was Jehovah drawing the attention of his servants, and
why?
74

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

I have chosen.’ ” (Read Isaiah 43:10-12.) But soon after 1919, our publications began to pay attention to
that Bible passage, encouraging all anointed ones to
share in the work Jehovah had assigned to them
—that of witnessing about him. In fact, from 1925 to
1931 alone, Isaiah chapter 43 was considered in 57
di?erent issues of The Watch Tower, and each issue applied Isaiah’s words to true Christians. Clearly, during those years, Jehovah was drawing the attention
of his servants to the work they had to do. Why so?
In a way, so that they could be “tested as to ?tness
?rst.” (1 Tim. 3:10) Before they could rightly bear
God’s name, the Bible Students had to prove to Jehovah by their works that they truly were his witnesses.—Luke 24:47, 48.
13

Third, Jehovah’s people came to appreciate the

importance of the sancti?cation of God’s name. During the 1920’s, they discerned that the sancti?cation of God’s name is the most important issue
to be settled. How does God’s Word reveal that
weighty truth? Consider two examples. What was
13. How does God’s Word reveal the most important issue to be settled?
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

75

HOW THE WATCHTOWER HAS
EXALTED GOD’S NAME
Throughout the years, the front cover of
the Watchtower magazine gave more and more importance
to the name Jehovah. Note some of the adjustments that
occurred on the magazine’s cover.
Zion’s Watch Tower, July 1879
From the outset, the magazine used God’s name. The second issue stated: “ ‘Zion’s Watch Tower’ has, we believe,
JEHOVAH for its backer.”
The Watchtower, October 15, 1931
The name Jehovah and the scripture Isaiah 43:12 became
part of the cover.
The Watchtower, January 1, 1939
The name Jehovah appeared in two places on the cover, together with Isaiah 43:12 and Ezekiel 35:15.
The Watchtower, March 1, 1939
The name Jehovah appeared on the cover in three places;
also starting with this issue, the full title of the magazine
became The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.
In addition, starting in the late 1920’s and continuing for
over 20 years, the ?rst paragraph of the ?rst article in each
issue of The Watchtower contained the name Jehovah. What
a ?ne reminder for God’s people to exalt God’s name!
76

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

the principal reason why God rescued Israel from
Egypt? Jehovah stated: “To have my name declared
in all the earth.” (Ex. 9:16) And why did Jehovah
show mercy to Israel when they rebelled against
him? Again, Jehovah said: “I acted for the sake of
my name so that it would not be profaned before the
nations.” (Ezek. 20:8-10) What did the Bible Students
learn from those and other Bible accounts?
By the late 1920’s, God’s people discerned the
signi?cance of what Isaiah had stated some 2,700
years earlier. Regarding Jehovah he said: “This is
how you led your people, to make a majestic name for
yourself.” (Isa. 63:14) The Bible Students understood
that the primary issue was, not personal salvation,
but the sanctifying of God’s name. (Isa. 37:20; Ezek.
38:23) In 1929, the book Prophecy summed up that
truth, stating: “Jehovah’s name is the most vital issue before all creation.” This adjusted understanding
further motivated God’s servants to witness about
Jehovah and to clear his name of slander.
14

14. (a) By the late 1920’s, what did God’s people discern? (b) What
e?ect did the deeper understanding acquired by the Bible Students have
on the preaching work? (See also the box “A Powerful Reason to
Preach.”)
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

77

A P OWERFUL REAS ON TO PREACH
HOW did having a clearer understanding of the issue
involving the sancti?cation of God’s name a?ect the
Bible Students’ view of the preaching work? In 1930,
The Watch Tower stated: “When this truth [about the
sancti?cation of God’s name] becomes thoroughly
entrenched in the mind of the Christian he begins to
realize what a marvelous privilege is his to be a witness to the word and name of Jehovah God.” Indeed, understanding that the sancti?cation of God’s
name was the main issue gave our brothers and sisters
a powerful reason to preach. (Ps. 8:1) Take Helen
Borchert as an example. She started pioneering on
April 1, 1930, and remained a faithful Witness until
she ?nished her earthly course in July 2003 at the age
of 96. What moved her to keep on preaching for decades? Many years later she said: “From that day until this moment, my most urgent desire has been . . . to
clear from slander the name and Word of Jehovah
God.” For us today, having a share in sanctifying
God’s name is still a powerful reason to preach.

By the dawn of the 1930’s, our brothers had acquired a proper view of the importance of God’s
15

15. (a) By the 1930’s, what had our brothers acquired? (b) What time
had come?
78

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

name, a clearer understanding of the work God had
assigned them to do, and a deeper insight into the
main issue to be settled. Now, Jehovah’s time had
come to give his servants the honor of publicly bearing his name. To see how that came about, let us
consider some past events.
Jehovah Takes “a People for His Name”
16 An outstanding way in which Jehovah exalts his
name is by having a people on earth who bear his
name. From 1513 B.C.E. onward, the nation of Israel represented Jehovah as his people. (Isa. 43:12)
However, they failed to keep their part of the covenant with God, and in 33 C.E., they lost their special relationship with him. Shortly thereafter, Jehovah “turned his attention to the nations to take out
of them a people for his name.” (Acts 15:14) That
newly chosen people became known as “the Israel of
God,” which consists of anointed followers of Christ
from various nations.—Gal. 6:16.
In about 44 C.E., Christ’s disciples were “by
divine providence called Christians.” (Acts 11:26)
17

16. (a) In what outstanding way does Jehovah exalt his name? (b) In
the past, who ?rst served as a people for God’s name?
17. What scheme did Satan succeed in carrying out?
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

79

Initially, that name was distinctive, for it referred to
true Christians only. (1 Pet. 4:16) However, as indicated in Jesus’ parable of the wheat and the weeds,
Satan succeeded in his scheme to apply the unique
name Christian to all kinds of imitation Christians.
Consequently, for many centuries, true Christians
did not stand out clearly from imitation Christians.
But that started to change during “the harvest season,” which began in 1914. Why? Because angels began separating imitation Christians from genuine
ones.—Matt. 13:30, 39-41.
18

After the appointment of the faithful slave in

1919, Jehovah helped his people to discern the work
he had assigned them to do. They quickly saw that
preaching from house to house set them apart from
all imitation Christians. Once they realized that
fact, it was not long before they understood that
the designation “Bible Students” was not distinctive
enough. Their prime purpose in life was not simply
to study the Bible but to witness about God and to
honor and exalt his name. So, what name would be
18. What helped our brothers to see that a new name was needed?
80

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

?tting for the work they were doing? That question
was answered in 1931.
19

In July 1931, some 15,000 Bible Students arrived

in Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A., for a convention. Seeing
the convention program, they were intrigued by the
two large letters J and W printed on its front cover.
‘What do those letters mean?’ they wondered. Some
thought they meant, ‘Just Watch’; others, ‘Just Wait.’
Then, on Sunday, July 26, Brother Joseph Rutherford presented a resolution containing the powerful
statement: “We desire to be known as and called by
the name, to wit, Jehovah’s witnesses.” At that moment, all in attendance understood the meaning of
those puzzling letters—they stood for Jehovah’s Witnesses, a Scriptural name based on Isaiah 43:10.
20

The audience responded to that resolution with

a tremendous shout and long applause. By radio, that
enthusiastic reaction in Columbus was heard halfway around the globe! Ernest and Naomi Barber in
Australia recalled: “When the applause went up in
America, the brothers in Melbourne jumped to their
19, 20. (a) What exciting resolution was made at a convention in
1931? (b) How did our brothers react to the adoption of the new name?
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

81

feet and kept on applauding. We will never forget
it!”1[2]
God’s Name Is B eing Exalted Worldwide
21 Having the Scriptural name Jehovah’s Witnesses gave God’s servants added strength to share in the
preaching work. Edward and Jessie Grimes, a pioneer couple in the United States who attended the
1931 convention in Columbus, observed: “We left
home as Bible Students, but we returned as Jehovah’s Witnesses. We were happy that we now had a
name that helped us to magnify the name of our
God.” After that convention, some Witnesses used a
new method to do just that. They introduced themselves to householders by handing them a card with
the message: “One of JEHOVAH’S witnesses preaching the Kingdom of JEHOVAH our God.” Yes, God’s
people were proud to bear the name Jehovah, and
they were ready to proclaim its signi?cance far and
wide.—Isa. 12:4.
22

Many years have passed since Jehovah moved

1[2] See Chapter 7, pages 125-130, for details about that use of the
radio.

21. How did the new name stimulate the preaching work?
22. What proves that Jehovah’s people have a distinct identity?
82

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

our anointed brothers to embrace their distinctive
name. During the intervening years, has Satan been
able to obscure the identity of God’s people? Has he
succeeded in absorbing us into the world’s religious
landscape? No, indeed! On the contrary, our distinct
identity as witnesses of God stands out more than
ever. (Read Micah 4:5; Malachi 3:18.) In fact, we have
become so closely associated with God’s name that
anyone who freely uses it today is quickly identi?ed
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Instead of being obscured by a range of mountainlike false religions, Jehovah’s true worship is “?rmly established above the
top of the mountains.” (Isa. 2:2) Today, Jehovah’s
worship and his sacred name are, indeed, highly exalted.
23

How strengthening it is to know that Jehovah

will shield us against Satan’s present and future attacks! (Ps. 121:5) With good reason we echo the sentiments of the psalmist who wrote: “Happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people he has chosen
as his own possession.”—Ps. 33:12.
23. According to Psalm 121:5, what important truth about Jehovah
gives us much strength?
JEHOVAH EXALTS HIS NAME

83

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What has the Kingdom accomplished
regarding God’s name?
? How do you personally share in sanctifying
God’s name?
? Why are you proud to bear God’s personal
name and eager to tell others about its
signi?cance?

84

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

5

The King Shines Light
on the Kingdom

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

God’s people come to recognize vital truths about the
Kingdom, its rulers, and its subjects, as well as the
requirement of loyalty

IMAGINE that an experienced guide is leading you
on a tour of a wondrous and beautiful city. The city
is new to you and to those with you, so you hang on
to the guide’s every word. At times, you and your fellow tourists wonder excitedly about some of the
city’s features that you have not yet seen. When you
ask your guide about such things, however, he withholds his comments until key moments, often just
when a certain sight is coming into view. In time, you
grow ever more impressed with his wisdom, for he
tells you what you need to know right when you
need to know it.
2

True Christians are in a situation similar to that

of the tourists. We are eagerly learning about the
1, 2. In what sense did Jesus prove to be a wise guide?
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

85

most wondrous of cities, “the city having real foundations,” the Kingdom of God. (Heb. 11:10) When
Jesus was on earth, he personally guided his followers, leading them to a deeper knowledge of that
Kingdom. Did he answer all their questions and tell
them everything about that Kingdom at once? No.
He said: “I still have many things to say to you, but
you are not able to bear them now.” (John 16:12) As
the wisest of guides, Jesus never burdened his disciples with knowledge that they were not prepared to
handle.
3

Jesus spoke the words recorded at John 16:12 on

the ?nal night of his earthly life. After his death,
how would he continue to teach faithful people
about God’s Kingdom? He assured his apostles: “The
spirit of the truth . . . will guide you into all the
truth.”1[1] (John 16:13) We may think of the holy spirit as a patient guide. The spirit is Jesus’ means of
teaching his followers whatever they need to know
1[1] According to one reference work, the Greek word for “guide”
in that verse means “to show the road.”

3, 4. (a) How has Jesus continued to teach faithful people about
God’s Kingdom? (b) What will we consider in this chapter?
86

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

about God’s Kingdom—right when they need to
know it.
4

Let us consider how Jehovah’s holy spirit has

been guiding sincere Christians into greater knowledge about that Kingdom. First, we will consider our
understanding of when God’s Kingdom began to
rule. Then, we will examine the identity and hopes
of the Kingdom’s rulers and its subjects. Finally, we
will see how Christ’s followers gained a clearer understanding of what loyalty to the Kingdom requires.
5

Understanding a Pivotal Year
As we saw in Chapter 2 of this book, the Bible

Students spent decades pointing out that the year
1914 would be signi?cant in ful?lling Bible prophecy. However, at that time they believed that Christ’s
presence had begun in 1874, that he had begun to
rule in heaven in 1878, and that the Kingdom would
not be fully set up until October 1914. The harvest
would extend from 1874 to 1914 and would culminate
5, 6. (a) The Bible Students held what mistaken views about the establishment of the Kingdom and the harvest? (b) Why should such
mistaken views not cast doubt on whether Jesus was guiding his followers?
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

87

in the gathering of the anointed to heaven. Do mistaken ideas such as these cast doubt on whether Jesus was guiding those faithful ones by means of holy
spirit?
6

Not at all! Think again of our opening illustra-

tion. Would the premature ideas and eager questions of the tourists cast doubt on the reliability of
their guide? Hardly! Similarly, although God’s people sometimes try to work out details of Jehovah’s
purpose before it is time for the holy spirit to guide
them to such truths, it is clear that Jesus is leading
them. Thus, faithful ones prove willing to be corrected and humbly adjust their views.—Jas. 4:6.
7

In the years following 1919, God’s people were

blessed with more and more ?ashes of spiritual light.
(Read Psalm 97:11.) In 1925, a landmark article appeared in The Watch Tower, entitled “Birth of the Nation.” It laid out convincing Scriptural evidence that
the Messianic Kingdom had been born in 1914,
ful?lling the prophetic picture of God’s heavenly woman giving birth, as recorded in Revelation
7. God’s people were blessed with what ?ashes of spiritual light?
88

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

chapter 12.1[2] The article further showed that the
persecution and trouble that came upon Jehovah’s
people during those war years were clear signs that
Satan had been hurled down from heaven, “having
great anger, knowing that he has a short period of
time.”—Rev. 12:12.
How important is the Kingdom? In 1928, The
Watch Tower began to stress that the Kingdom was
more important than personal salvation by means of
the ransom. Indeed, it is by means of the Messianic
Kingdom that Jehovah will sanctify his name, vindicate his sovereignty, and carry out all his purposes
regarding mankind.
8

Who would rule with Christ in that Kingdom?
Who would be the earthly subjects of that Kingdom?
And what work should occupy Christ’s followers?
9

The Harvest Work Focuses on the Anointed
10 Decades before 1914, true Christians already understood that 144,000 faithful followers of Christ
1[2] Before then, it was thought that the vision pointed to a war
between pagan Rome and papal Rome.

8, 9. (a) How did the importance of God’s Kingdom come to the fore?
(b) What questions will we consider?
10. What have God’s people long understood about the 144,000?
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

89

would rule with him in heaven.1[3] Those Bible Students saw that the number was literal and that it began to be ?lled back in the ?rst century C.E.
11

What, though, were those prospective members

of Christ’s bride assigned to do while they were yet
on the earth? They saw that Jesus had emphasized
the preaching work and had connected it to a period of harvest. (Matt. 9:37; John 4:35) As we noted in
Chapter 2, for a time they held that the harvest period would last 40 years, climaxing with the gathering of the anointed to heaven. However, because the
work continued after 40 years elapsed, more clari?cation was needed. Now we know that the harvest season—the season for separating wheat from
weeds, faithful anointed Christians from imitation
Christians—began in 1914. The time had come to focus attention on the gathering of the remaining number of that heavenly class!
1[3] In June 1880, Zion’s Watch Tower suggested that the 144,000
would be ?eshly Jews converted by 1914. However, later in 1880, an
understanding was published that more closely corresponds to the
one we have held consistently since then.

11. How did prospective members of Christ’s bride progress in knowledge about their earthly assignment?
90

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

12

From 1919 onward, Christ kept guiding the

faithful and discreet slave to emphasize the preaching work. He had made that assignment in the ?rst
century. (Matt. 28:19, 20) He also indicated what
qualities his anointed followers would need in order
to ful?ll that preaching commission. How so? In his
illustration of the ten virgins, he showed that the
anointed would have to remain watchful, spiritually
alert, if they were to reach their ultimate goal of
sharing in the great wedding feast in heaven, when
Christ would be united with his “bride” of 144,000.
(Rev. 21:2) Then, in his illustration of the talents, Jesus taught that his anointed servants would be diligent in carrying out the preaching work he had entrusted to them.—Matt. 25:1-30.
13

The anointed have proved to be both vigilant

and diligent during this past century. Without fail,
their watchfulness will be rewarded! However, would
the great harvest work be limited to gathering the
rest of Christ’s 144,000 corulers?
12, 13. How have Jesus’ illustrations of the ten virgins and of the talents been ful?lled in the last days?
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

91

14

The Kingdom Gathers Its Earthly Subjects!
Faithful men and women have long been in-

tensely curious about the “great crowd” (“great multitude,” King James Version) mentioned at Revelation
7:9-14. Not surprisingly, before it was Christ’s time
to reveal the identity of this large group, much that
was said on the subject veered wide of the clear, simple truths we know and love today.
15

In 1917, the book The Finished Mystery asserted

that there are “two degrees or kinds of Heavenly salvation, and two degrees or kinds of earthly salvation.” Who made up the four groups of people
with those di?erent hopes for salvation? First, there
were the 144,000, who would rule with Christ. Second, there was the great multitude. Back then, the
idea was that these were nominal Christians who
were still in the churches of Christendom. They had
a measure of faith but not enough to take a ?rm
stand of integrity. Therefore, they would be given lesser positions in heaven. As to the earth, it
was thought that a third group, the “ancient wor14, 15. What four di?erent groups were discussed in The Finished
Mystery?
92

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

thies”—such faithful ones as Abraham, Moses, and
others—would have positions of authority over the
fourth group, the world of mankind.
How did holy spirit guide Christ’s followers to
the understanding that we cherish today? It happened progressively, through a series of ?ashes of
spiritual light. As early as 1923, The Watch Tower
drew attention to a group with no heavenly aspirations who would live on earth under Christ’s reign.
In 1932, The Watchtower discussed Jonadab (Jehonadab), who attached himself to God’s anointed Israelite King Jehu to support him in the war against
false worship. (2 Ki. 10:15-17) The article said that
there was a class of people in modern times who
were like Jonadab, adding that Jehovah would take
this class “through the Armageddon trouble” to live
here on the earth.
16

In 1935 came a brilliant ?ash of spiritual light.
At the convention held in Washington, D.C., the
great multitude was identi?ed as an earthly class, the
17

16. What ?ashes of spiritual light came in 1923 and in 1932?
17. (a) In 1935, what brilliant ?ash of spiritual light came? (b) How
were faithful Christians a?ected by the new understanding of the great
multitude? (See the box “A Great Sigh of Relief.”)
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

93

“A GREAT SIGH OF RELIEF”
THE discourse on the great multitude that was delivered on May 31, 1935, at the convention in Washington, D.C., U.S.A., had a profound e?ect on God’s people. Consider some reactions from those who were
present.
? “Prior to 1935, there was often much discussion
among the brothers as to whether one was of the
anointed. I recall very well the day Brother Rutherford spoke on the subject ‘The Great Multitude.’ I
had been helping to wash dishes in the cafeteria, and
when it was time for the talk, I went up to the balcony and took a seat alone. After covering the matter quite thoroughly, Brother Rutherford asked all
who believed they were part of the great multitude
to stand. I immediately stood up and then looked
around, and it seemed that most of those present were
also standing. From that day forward, there has never
been a question in my mind as to whether I was of the
anointed. . . . I am happy to be among those of the other sheep.”—Henry A. Cantwell.
? “It was so heartening to many, for I used to hear
from brothers that they were not sure they were of the
anointed. Yet, they did not want to think of themselves as being among a ‘less faithful class,’ as the
94

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

great multitude was thought to be. A great sigh of relief was voiced by many, and as this new truth sank
in, a new sense of zeal took hold of those who now understood where they stood before Jehovah.”—Herman L. Philbrick.
? “This assembly gave us much to rejoice over. We
could freely o?er people a hope of everlasting life on
earth. Many who had partaken of the Memorial [emblems] could see where they stood and no longer [partook].”—John C. Booth.

same as the sheep in Jesus’ parable of the sheep
and the goats. (Matt. 25:33-40) The great multitude
would be among the “other sheep,” of whom Jesus
said: “Those too I must bring in.” (John 10:16) When
the speaker, J. F. Rutherford, asked: “Will all those
who have the hope of living forever on the earth
please stand?” more than half the audience rose to
their feet! “Behold!” he declared. “The great multitude!” Many were deeply moved to understand at
last their hope for the future.
18

Ever since then, Christ has guided his people to

18. How have Christ’s followers focused their e?orts in the ministry,
and with what result?
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

95

focus their e?orts on gathering the prospective members of this great crowd that will emerge, alive and
safe, from the great tribulation. At ?rst, the ingathering did not seem impressive. Brother Rutherford
once even commented: “It looks as if the ‘great
multitude’ is not going to be so great after all.”
Of course, we now know how greatly Jehovah has
blessed the harvest since then! Under the guidance
of Jesus and the holy spirit, both the anointed and
their companions of the “other sheep” have become
just what Jesus foretold—“one ?ock” serving together under “one shepherd.”
The vast majority of faithful people will live forever in an earthly paradise, governed by Christ and
his 144,000 corulers. Is it not a pleasure to contemplate the way Christ has guided God’s people to such
a clear Scriptural hope for the future? What a privilege we have to share that hope with those we meet
in the ministry! Let us be as active as our circumstances will allow so that the great crowd will continue to swell in numbers, raising an ever greater
shout of praise to Jehovah’s name!—Read Luke 10:2.
19

19. How can we have a part in enlarging the great crowd?
96

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

20

What Loyalty to the Kingdom Requires
As God’s people continued to learn about the

Kingdom, they also needed to grasp fully what it
means to be loyal to that heavenly government. In
this regard, in 1922, The Watch Tower pointed out that
there are two organizations at work, Jehovah’s and
Satan’s, with Satan’s being made up of commercial,
religious, and political elements. Those who are loyal to God’s Kingdom under Christ must not compromise their loyalty through improper involvement
with any aspect of Satan’s organization. (2 Cor. 6:
17) What does that mean?
21

The spiritual food from the faithful slave has

consistently exposed the corruption of big business and has warned God’s people not to give in
to its rampant materialism. (Matt. 6:24) Likewise,
our publications have kept the spotlight focused on
the religious part of Satan’s organization. In 1963,
The Watchtower clearly showed that “Babylon the
20. Satan’s organization is composed of what elements, and how is
Christian loyalty involved?
21. (a) How has the faithful slave warned God’s people about big business? (b) In 1963, what did The Watchtower reveal about “Babylon the
Great”?
THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

97

Great” represented not only Christendom but also
the whole world empire of false religion. Thus, as we
will see more fully in Chapter 10 of this book, God’s
people in every land and culture have been helped
to “get out of her,” cleansing themselves of all false
religious practices.—Rev. 18:2, 4.
What, though, about the political part of Satan’s organization? Could true Christians take part
in the wars and con?icts of the nations? During
World War I, the Bible Students generally understood that Christ’s followers should have no share in
killing their fellow humans. (Matt. 26:52) However,
for many, the exhortation found at Romans 13:1 to
be obedient to “the superior authorities” meant that
they should join the army, wear soldiers’ uniforms,
and even bear arms; however, when asked to kill the
enemy, they should shoot into the air.
22

Just as World War II was erupting in 1939, The
Watchtower featured an in-depth discussion of neutrality. The article showed clearly that Christians
23

22. During World War I, how did many of God’s people understand
the exhortation of Romans 13:1?
23, 24. What was our understanding of Romans 13:1 during World
War II, and to what more accurate view were Christ’s followers guided?
98

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

would have no part at all in the wars and con?icts
of the nations of Satan’s world. What timely guidance! Christ’s followers were thus protected from the
horri?c bloodguilt that clung to the nations in that
war. Beginning in 1929, however, our publications
had also reasoned that the superior authorities of
Romans 13:1 were not the secular rulers at all, but
Jehovah and Jesus. A more accurate understanding
was still needed.
The holy spirit guided Christ’s followers to just
such a view in 1962, when landmark articles on Romans 13:1-7 were published in the November 15 and
December 1 issues of The Watchtower. Finally, God’s
people grasped the principle of relative subjection
that Jesus had revealed in his famous words: “Pay
back Caesar’s things to Caesar but God’s things to
God.” (Luke 20:25) True Christians now understand
that the superior authorities are the secular powers
of this world and that Christians must be subject to
them. However, such subjection is relative. When the
secular authorities ask us to disobey Jehovah God,
then we answer as did the apostles of old: “We must
obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) In
24

THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

99

Chapters 13 and 14 of this book, we will learn more
about how God’s people have put the principle of
Christian neutrality into action.
Think of all that Christ’s followers have been
taught about the Kingdom over this past century.
We have learned when God’s Kingdom was established in heaven and how important it is. We have a
clear picture of the two hopes o?ered to faithful
people, the heavenly hope and the earthly hope. And
we know how to demonstrate our loyalty to God’s
Kingdom while being in relative subjection to worldly authorities. Ask yourself, ‘Would I know any of
those precious truths if Jesus Christ had not guided
his faithful slave on earth to grasp them and then to
teach them?’ What a blessing to have Christ and the
holy spirit guiding us!
25

25. Why do you appreciate the guidance of the holy spirit in understanding God’s Kingdom?

100

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How have true Christians come to understand
the truth about the year 1914 and the
importance of God’s Kingdom?
? What moves you to help others become
earthly subjects of the Kingdom?
? What balanced view do we now have
regarding loyalty to the Kingdom and
subjection to the superior authorities?
? What convinces you that Christ has been
using holy spirit to guide his people in their
understanding of God’s Kingdom?

THE KING SHINES LIGHT ON THE KINGDOM

101

SECTION 2

K INGD OM P REACHING
Spreading the Good News Worldwide
YOU prepare for the ministry early on your day o? from
secular work. You hesitate for a moment, feeling a bit tired.
A morning of rest seems so appealing! But you pray about
it and resolve to go. You work with a faithful elderly sister, and her endurance and kindness touch your heart. And
as you share the message of the truth from house to house,
it occurs to you that your brothers and sisters around the
world are sharing this same message, using the same literature, all bene?ting from the same training. By the time
you get home, you feel energized. You are so glad you did
not stay home!
At present, the Christian ministry is the chief work of
God’s Kingdom. Jesus foretold that the preaching work
would have an astounding scope during the last days.
(Matt. 24:14) How has his prophecy been ful?lled? In this
section, we will examine the people, the methods, and the
tools that have been so important to the Christian ministry, which is helping millions the world over to see God’s
Kingdom as real.

6

People Who Preach
Ministers Offer Themselves Willingly

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

The King raises up an army of preachers

POLITICAL RULERS often make promises that go
unful?lled. Even those with the best of intentions
may be unable to carry out their promises. In refreshing contrast, the Messianic King, Jesus Christ,
always proves true to his word.
2

After he became King in 1914, Jesus was ready

to ful?ll a prophecy he had made some 1,900 years
earlier. Shortly before he died, Jesus foretold: “This
good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all
the inhabited earth.” (Matt. 24:14) The ful?llment of
those words would be part of the sign of his presence in Kingdom power. However, an important
question arises: How would the King be able to raise
up an army of willing preachers in the last days—a
time period that would be marked by a sel?sh,
1, 2. What great work did Jesus foretell, and what important question
arises?
PEOPLE WHO PREACH

103

loveless, and irreligious spirit? (Matt. 24:12; 2 Tim. 3:
1-5) We need to know, for the answer to that question involves all true Christians.
Look again at Jesus’ prophetic words. Do the
words “will be preached” express con?dence? Indeed,
they do! Jesus was sure that he would have willing
supporters in the last days. Where did he get such
con?dence? He learned it from his Father. (John 12:
45; 14:9) In his prehuman existence, Jesus observed
?rsthand that Jehovah has con?dence in the willing
spirit of His worshippers. Let us see how Jehovah
expressed that con?dence.
3

“Your People Will O?er Themselves Willingly”
4 Recall what happened when Jehovah directed
Moses to construct the tabernacle, or tent, that was
to be the center of worship for the nation of Israel.
Jehovah, through Moses, invited all the people to
support the work. Moses told them: “Let everyone
with a willing heart bring a contribution for Jehovah.” The result? The people “continued to bring . . .
3. What con?dence did Jesus express, and where did he get such con?dence?
4. What work did Jehovah invite the Israelites to support, and how did
they respond?
104

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

voluntary o?erings, morning after morning.” They
brought so much that they had to be “restrained
from bringing in anything else”! (Ex. 35:5; 36:3, 6)
The Israelites lived up to the con?dence that Jehovah had placed in them.
Did Jehovah expect to ?nd such a willing spirit
among his worshippers in the last days? Yes! More
than 1,000 years before Jesus was born on earth, Jehovah inspired David to write about the time when
the Messiah would begin to rule. (Read Psalm 110:
1-3.) Jesus, the newly installed King, would have enemies who would oppose him. Yet, he would also
have an army of supporters. They would not have to
be forced into serving the King. Even the young
among them would o?er themselves freely, becoming a multitude so great that they could aptly be
compared to the countless dewdrops that blanket
the ground in the morning sun.1[1]
5

Jesus knew that the prophecy recorded in
Psalm 110 applied to him. (Matt. 22:42-45) Hence, he
6

1[1] In the Bible, dew is associated with abundance.—Gen. 27:28;
Mic. 5:7.

5, 6. According to Psalm 110:1-3, what spirit did Jehovah and thus
Jesus expect to ?nd among true worshippers in the time of the end?
PEOPLE WHO PREACH

105

had every reason to be con?dent that he would have
loyal supporters who would o?er themselves willingly to preach the good news in all the earth. What do
the historical facts show? Has the King, in fact,
raised up an army of willing preachers in these last
days?
“My Privilege and Duty
Is to Announce That Message”
7 Shortly after he was installed as King, Jesus took
steps to prepare his followers for the vast work to be
done. As we saw in Chapter 2, he did an inspection
and a cleansing work from 1914 to early 1919. (Mal.
3:1-4) Then, in 1919, he appointed the faithful slave
to take the lead among his followers. (Matt. 24:45)
Especially from that time onward, that slave began
dispensing spiritual food—by means of convention
discourses and printed publications—that repeatedly emphasized the responsibility of all Christians to
have a personal share in preaching.
8 Convention discourses. Eager for direction, the Bi7. After he was installed as King, what steps did Jesus take to prepare
his supporters for the work ahead?
8-10. How did conventions give impetus to the preaching work? Give
an example. (See also the box “Early Conventions That Gave Impetus to the Preaching Work.”)
106

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ble Students gathered at Cedar Point, Ohio, U.S.A.,
from September 1 to 8, 1919, for their ?rst major
convention following World War I. On the second
day, Brother Rutherford gave a discourse in which
he pointedly told the delegates: “A Christian’s mission on earth . . . is to proclaim the message of the
Lord’s kingdom.”
The climax of that convention came three days
later when Brother Rutherford delivered the talk entitled “Address to Co-laborers,” which was published
in The Watch Tower under the title “Announcing the
Kingdom.” He stated: “In sober moments a Christian
naturally asks himself, Why am I on the earth? And
the answer of necessity must be, The Lord has graciously made me his ambassador to bear the divine
message of reconciliation to the world, and my privilege and duty is to announce that message.”
9

In that historic discourse, Brother Rutherford
announced that a new magazine, The Golden Age
(now called Awake!), would be published for use in
directing people to the Kingdom as mankind’s only
hope. He then asked how many of those in the audience wanted to have a share in distributing this
10

PEOPLE WHO PREACH

107

journal. A report on the convention explained: “The
response was an inspiring scene. Six thousand people, as one person, arose.”1[2] Clearly, the King had
willing supporters who were eager to proclaim his
Kingdom!
11

Printed publications. Through the pages of The

Watch Tower, the signi?cance of the work Jesus foretold—namely, the preaching of the good news of
the Kingdom—became clearer and clearer. Consider
some examples from the early 1920’s.
12

What message would be proclaimed in ful?ll-

ment of Matthew 24:14? When would that work be
done? The July 1, 1920, issue of The Watch Tower, in
the article entitled “Gospel of the Kingdom,” explained the message, stating: “The good news here is
1[2] The pamphlet To Whom the Work Is Entrusted explained: “The
Golden Age work is a house-to-house canvass with the kingdom message. . . . In addition to the canvass, a copy of The Golden Age is
to be left at each home, whether a subscription is taken or not.”
For years thereafter, the brothers were encouraged to o?er people
subscriptions to The Golden Age as well as to The Watch Tower. Beginning February 1, 1940, Jehovah’s people were encouraged to
distribute individual copies of the magazines and to report the
number placed.

11, 12. What did The Watch Tower in 1920 say as to when the work
that Jesus foretold would be done?
108

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

EARLY CONVENTIONS THAT GAVE
IMPETUS TO THE PREACHING WORK
? 1919, Cedar Point, Ohio, U.S.A. The program highlighted
that a Christian’s vocation was “to announce the incoming glorious kingdom of Messiah.” An announcement
was made that a new magazine, The Golden Age, would be
published for use in directing people to the Kingdom. To
organize and give impetus to the work, a service director
would be appointed for each class, or congregation, of Bible Students.
? 1922, Cedar Point, Ohio. During the discourse entitled
“The Kingdom,” the speaker urged: “Advertise, advertise,
advertise the King and his Kingdom.” One of those present, Anna E. Zimmerman, later recalled: “Our mission
was now loud and clear—to advertise the King and the
Kingdom, and we went forth from that convention and
did just that.”
? 1931, Columbus, Ohio. The Bible Students adopted a
new name—Jehovah’s Witnesses. That name clearly
identi?ed the responsibility of those who worship Jehovah, namely, to proclaim his name and Kingdom.
? 1935, Washington, D.C. The “great multitude,” or “great
crowd,” was identi?ed as consisting of individuals who
have the prospect of living forever on earth. (Rev. 7:9-17;
King James Version) With their understanding thus clari?ed, Jehovah’s people discerned that the scope of the
preaching work before them was indeed great.
PEOPLE WHO PREACH

109

concerning the end of the old order of things and
the establishment of Messiah’s kingdom.” The article clearly showed when this message would be
preached, saying: “This message must be delivered
between the time of the great world war [World
War I] and the time of the ‘great tribulation.’ ”
Hence, the article noted: “Now is the time . . . to proclaim far and wide in Christendom this good news.”
13

Would God’s people be pressured into doing the

work that Jesus foretold? No. The article “Be of
Good Courage,” in the March 15, 1921, issue of The
Watch Tower, appealed to the willing spirit of anointed Christians. Each one was encouraged to ask himself: “Is it not my greatest privilege, as well as my
duty, to participate in this work?” The article went
on to say: “We feel assured that when you do see it
[as a privilege to share in the work] you will be like
Jeremiah, in whose heart the word of the Lord was
‘as a burning ?re shut up in [his] bones,’ urging him
on so that he could not refrain from speaking.” (Jer.
20:9) That warm encouragement re?ected the con?13. How did The Watch Tower in 1921 appeal to the willing spirit of
anointed Christians?
110

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

dence that Jehovah and Jesus have in loyal Kingdom
supporters.
How should true Christians reach others with
the Kingdom message? The short but powerful article entitled “Service Essential,” in the August 15,
1922, issue of The Watch Tower, urged anointed Christians to take part in “actively carrying the printed
message to the people and talking to them at their
doors, giving the witness that the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”
14

Clearly, from 1919 on, Christ has used his faithful and discreet slave to emphasize repeatedly that a
Christian’s privilege and duty on earth is to proclaim
the Kingdom message. How, though, did the early Bible Students respond to the encouragement to share
in the work of Kingdom proclamation?
15

“The Faithful Will B e Volunteers”
16 In the 1920’s and 1930’s, some resisted the idea
that all anointed Christians should share in the ministry. The November 1, 1927, Watch Tower explained
14, 15. In 1922, The Watch Tower urged anointed Christians to reach
others in what way?
16. How did some of the elected elders react to the idea that all should
share in the ministry?
PEOPLE WHO PREACH

111

what was happening: “There are those today in the
church [congregation] occupying the responsible position of elder . . . who refuse to encourage their
brethren to have part in the service, and who refuse
to participate in the service themselves. . . . They
sco? at the suggestion of going from door to door to
carry the message of God, his King and his kingdom,
to the people.” The article pointedly said: “The time
has come for the faithful to mark such and to avoid
them, and to say to them that no longer will we entrust such men with the o?ce of eldership.” 1[3]
Happily, most in the congregations responded
enthusiastically to the direction from headquarters.
They counted it a privilege to share the Kingdom
message. The Watch Tower of March 15, 1926, put it
this way: “The faithful will be volunteers . . . to tell
this message to the people.” Such faithful ones lived
up to the prophetic words found at Psalm 110:3 and
17

1[3] At that time, elders were elected democratically by the congregation. Therefore, a congregation could refuse to vote for men
who were opposed to the ministry. The change to theocratic appointment of elders will be discussed in Chapter 12.

17, 18. How did most in the congregations respond to the direction
from headquarters, and how have millions responded over the past 100
years?
112

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

proved themselves to be willing supporters of the
Messianic King.
18 Over the past 100 years, millions have o?ered
themselves willingly to carry out the work of Kingdom proclamation. In the next few chapters, we will
discuss how they have preached—the methods and
the tools they have used—and what the results have
been. First, though, let us discuss why millions have
shared in this Kingdom-preaching work voluntarily,
despite living in a me-?rst world. As we consider
why, we do well to ask ourselves, ‘Why do I share
the good news with others?’
“Keep . . . S eeking First the Kingdom”
19 Jesus counseled his followers to “keep . . . seeking ?rst the Kingdom.” (Matt. 6:33) Why do we heed
that counsel? Basically, because we recognize the
importance of the Kingdom, that it is central to
God’s purpose. As we saw in the preceding chapter,
the holy spirit has gradually revealed thrilling truths
about the Kingdom. When precious Kingdom truth
touches our heart, we feel impelled to seek ?rst that
Kingdom.
19. Why do we heed Jesus’ counsel to “keep . . . seeking ?rst the Kingdom”?
PEOPLE WHO PREACH

113

20

Jesus knew how his followers would respond to

the counsel to keep seeking ?rst the Kingdom. Consider his illustration of the hidden treasure. (Read
Matthew 13:44.) In the course of his daily work, the
?eld laborer in the illustration happens to ?nd a hidden treasure and immediately recognizes its value.
What does he do? “Because of his joy, he goes and
sells everything he has and buys that ?eld.” What is
the lesson for us? When we ?nd Kingdom truth and
recognize its value, we will joyfully make whatever
sacri?ces are needed so that we may keep Kingdom
interests where they belong—?rst in our life. 1[4]
21

Loyal Kingdom supporters show by deeds, not

mere words, that they are seeking ?rst the Kingdom.
1[4] Jesus made a similar point in his illustration of a traveling merchant who goes out in search of a pearl of high value.
When the merchant ?nds it, he sells everything he has and buys it.
(Matt. 13:45, 46) The two parables also teach us that we may learn
of Kingdom truth in di?erent ways. Some stumble upon it, so to
speak; others search for it. But no matter how we ?nd the truth,
we are willing to make sacri?ces in order to put the Kingdom ?rst
in our life.

20. How does Jesus’ illustration of the hidden treasure show how his
followers would respond to the counsel to keep seeking ?rst the Kingdom?
21, 22. How do loyal Kingdom supporters show that they are seeking
?rst the Kingdom? Give an example.
114

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

They devote their lives, their abilities, and their resources to the Kingdom-preaching work. Many have
made great sacri?ces in order to pursue the full-time
ministry. All such willing preachers have seen ?rsthand that Jehovah blesses those who put the Kingdom ?rst. Consider an example from the early days.
Avery and Lovenia Bristow served together as
colporteurs (pioneers) in the southern United States
starting in the late 1920’s. Years later, Lovenia recalled: “Avery and I have had many happy years together in the pioneer work since then. There have
been many times when we did not know where the
money for gasoline or groceries would come from.
But one way or another, Jehovah always provided.
We just kept on keeping on. We always had what we
actually needed.” Lovenia remembered one occasion
when they were serving in Pensacola, Florida, and
were low on money and groceries. They came home
to their trailer and found two large bags of groceries along with a note that read, “With love from the
Pensacola Company.” 1[5] Re?ecting on her decades
in the full-time ministry, Lovenia said: “Jehovah
22

1[5] Congregations were then called companies.
PEOPLE WHO PREACH

115

never forsakes us. He never betrays the trust we put
in him.”
23

We cannot all do the same amount of preaching.

Our circumstances vary. However, all of us can
count it a privilege to declare the good news wholesouled. (Col. 3:23) Because we prize the precious
Kingdom truth we have found, we are willing—yes,
eager—to make whatever sacri?ces we can in order
to serve to the fullest extent possible. Is that not
your determination?
24

Over the past century, the King has indeed been

ful?lling his prophetic words recorded at Matthew
24:14. And he has done so without using coercion.
After coming out of this self-centered world, his followers have willingly o?ered themselves to preach.
Their earth-wide preaching of the good news is part
of the sign of Jesus’ presence in Kingdom power
—and one of the Kingdom’s greatest accomplishments in the last days.
23. How do you feel about the Kingdom truth that you have found, and
what are you determined to do?
24. What is one of the Kingdom’s greatest accomplishments in the last
days?
116

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? Why was Jesus con?dent that he would have
willing supporters in the last days?
? How has the faithful and discreet slave
emphasized the responsibility of all to have a
personal share in preaching?
? How do you feel about the Kingdom truth you
have found, and how can you show that you
are seeking ?rst the Kingdom?

PEOPLE WHO PREACH

117

7

Methods of Preaching
Using Every Means to Reach People

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

God’s people use a variety of methods of preaching to reach
the largest audience possible

CROWDS gather around Jesus on the shore of a
lake, but he boards a boat and pulls away a short
distance. Why? He knows that the surface of the water will amplify his voice and that the large audience
will be able to hear his message more clearly.—Read
Mark 4:1, 2.
2

In the decades surrounding the Kingdom’s birth,

faithful disciples of Christ followed his example, using novel techniques to spread the good news of the
Kingdom to large audiences. Under the direction of
the King, God’s people continue to innovate and
adapt as circumstances change and new technologies
become available. We want to reach as many as pos1, 2. (a) What technique did Jesus use in order to speak to a large
audience? (b) How have faithful disciples of Christ followed his example, and why?
118

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

sible before the end comes. (Matt. 24:14) Consider
just some of the methods we have used to reach people, no matter where they live. Think, too, of ways
that you can imitate the faith of those who spread
the good news in the early days.
Reaching Large Audiences
3 Newspapers. Brother Russell and his associates
had been publishing the Watch Tower since 1879,
bringing the Kingdom message to many people. In
the decade prior to 1914, however, Christ seems to
have maneuvered matters so that the good news
would reach an even wider audience. The chain of
events began in 1903. In that year, Dr. E. L. Eaton,
a spokesman for a group of Protestant ministers in
Pennsylvania, challenged Charles Taze Russell to a
series of debates on Bible doctrine. In a letter to Russell, Eaton wrote: “I have thought that a public debate of some of those questions about which you and
I di?er . . . would be of immense interest to the public.” Russell and his associates also thought the public would be interested, so they arranged to have
the debates published in a leading newspaper, The
3. How were enemies of the truth frustrated by our use of newspapers?
METHODS OF PREACHING

119

Pittsburgh Gazette. The newspaper articles were so
popular and Russell’s clear explanation of Bible
truth so compelling that the paper o?ered to publish Russell’s lectures every week. How that development must have frustrated enemies of the truth!
4

More newspapers soon wanted to carry Russell’s

lectures. By 1908, the Watch Tower could report that
the sermons were published in “eleven newspapers
regularly.” However, brothers familiar with newspaper work advised Russell that if he moved the Society’s o?ces from Pittsburgh to a city that was
better known, more newspapers would carry the
Bible-based articles. After weighing that advice and
other factors, Russell moved the o?ces to Brooklyn,
New York, in 1909. The result? Just months after
that move, some 400 newspapers were publishing the
lectures, with more constantly being added to the
list. By the time the Kingdom was established in
1914, over 2,000 newspapers in four languages were
publishing Russell’s sermons and articles!
5

What important lesson does that development

4, 5. What quality did Russell display, and how can those with positions of responsibility imitate his example?
120

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

provide? Those who have a measure of authority in
God’s organization today do well to imitate Russell’s
humility. In what way? When making important decisions, consider the advice of others.—Read Proverbs
15:22.
6

The Kingdom truths published in those news-

paper articles changed people’s lives. (Heb. 4:12) For
example, Ora Hetzel, who was baptized in 1917, was
one of many who ?rst learned the truth through
such articles. “After I was married,” said Ora, “I
went to visit my mother in Rochester, Minnesota.
When I arrived, I found her cutting out articles from
a newspaper. They were sermons by Russell. Mother explained the things she had learned from them.”
Ora accepted the truths she learned and for some six
decades was a faithful proclaimer of God’s Kingdom.
7

In 1916, two key events caused those taking the

lead to reassess the use of newspapers in spreading
the good news. First, the Great War that was raging
at the time made printing supplies di?cult to obtain.
6. How did the truths published in newspaper articles a?ect one person?
7. Why did those taking the lead reassess the use of newspapers?
METHODS OF PREACHING

121

In 1916, a report from our newspaper department in
Britain highlighted the challenge, saying: “There are
just over 30 papers publishing the Sermons at the
present time. It is quite likely that this number will
be greatly reduced shortly owing to the increasingly
high price of paper.” The second event was the death
of Brother Russell on October 31, 1916. Thus, The
Watch Tower of December 15, 1916, announced: “Now
that Brother Russell has passed beyond, the sermon
feature [in the newspapers] will be discontinued entirely.” Although this avenue of preaching came to
an end, other methods, such as the “Photo-Drama of
Creation,” continued to have great success.
Picture presentations. Russell and his associates
worked for some three years to produce the “PhotoDrama of Creation,” which was released in 1914.
(Prov. 21:5) The Drama, as it was called, was an innovative combination of moving pictures, sound recordings, and colored glass slides. Hundreds of people took part in reenacting Bible scenes that were
captured on ?lm, and even animals were involved.
“The largest part of the population of one of the
8

8. What was involved in producing the “Photo-Drama of Creation”?
122

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

large zoological gardens,” says a report from 1913,
“was brought into use in order to reproduce in Motion talking pictures Noah’s part in the big show.”
As for the hundreds of di?erent glass slides used in
the production, artists in London, New York, Paris,
and Philadelphia colored each one by hand.
Why was so much time and expense poured into
making the “Photo-Drama”? A resolution adopted at
the 1913 series of conventions explains: “The unprecedented success of the American newspapers in
moulding public opinion by the aid of cartoons and
illustrations in their news and magazine sections, together with the wonderful popularity and adaptability of moving pictures, has fully demonstrated their
worth and, we believe, fully justi?es us, as progressive preachers and Bible class teachers, in giving our unquali?ed endorsement of moving pictures
and stereopticon slides as an e?ective and desirable
method for evangelists and teachers.”
9

During 1914, the “Photo-Drama” was shown in
80 cities each day. Almost eight million people in
10

9. Why was so much time and expense poured into making the “PhotoDrama”?
10. How widely was the “Photo-Drama” shown?
METHODS OF PREACHING

123

the United States and Canada saw the presentation. That same year, the “Photo-Drama” was shown
in Australia, Britain, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland. A
simpli?ed version of the production, one that did not
include the motion pictures, was assembled for use
in smaller towns. That version—the “Eureka Drama”—was cheaper to produce and easier to transport. By 1916, either the “Photo-Drama” or the “Eureka Drama” had been translated into Armenian,
Dano-Norwegian, French, German, Greek, Italian,
Polish, Spanish, and Swedish.
11

The French translation of the “Photo-Drama”

had a great impact on an 18-year-old named Charles
Rohner. “It was presented in my town—Colmar, Alsace, France,” says Charles. “From the very outset, I
was impressed by the clear presentation of Bible
truth.”
12

As a result, Charles was baptized and in 1922

entered full-time service. One of his ?rst assignments
was to help present the “Photo-Drama” to audiences
11, 12. What impact did the “Photo-Drama” have on one young man,
and what example did he set?
124

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

in France. Describing this work, Charles says: “I was
assigned several jobs—to play the violin, to be the
accounts servant, and to be the literature servant. I
was also asked to quiet the audience before the program began. During intermission, we presented literature. We assigned each brother or sister a section of
the hall. Each one had an armful of literature and
approached every person in the section. In addition,
at the entrance to the hall, we had tables full of literature.” In 1925, Charles was invited to serve at
Bethel in Brooklyn, New York. There he was assigned to conduct an orchestra for the newly established radio station WBBR. After considering the example of Brother Rohner, we could ask ourselves,
‘Am I willing to accept whatever assignments I am
given to help spread the Kingdom message?’—Read
Isaiah 6:8.
13

Radio. In the 1920’s, the work with the “Photo-

Drama” began to wind down, but radio emerged as
a signi?cant way to spread the good news of the
Kingdom. On April 16, 1922, Brother Rutherford
13, 14. How was radio used to spread the good news? (See also the
boxes “Programs on WBBR” and “A Momentous Convention.”)
METHODS OF PREACHING

125

PRO GRAMS ON WBBR
WBBR broadcast Bible lectures and music. It also
carried such programs as “Watching the World.”
For this, brothers in the newsroom gathered reports
from international news services. Another program
had the title “A Young Minister Speaks.” Yet another was called “Home Bible Study Time.” In this
program, Witnesses portrayed a model family Bible
study. WBBR also broadcast Bible dramas and reenactments of recent court trials involving Jehovah’s
people. Those reenactments exposed the clergy as
promoters of opposition and turned the spotlight on
prejudiced judges.

gave his ?rst radio broadcast from the Metropolitan
Opera House in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. An estimated 50,000 people heard the talk “Millions Now
Living Will Never Die.” Then, in 1923, came the ?rst
broadcast of a convention session. In addition to using commercial stations, those taking the lead decided that it would be wise for us to build our own station, which was built on Staten Island, New York,
and registered as WBBR. The initial broadcast was
aired on February 24, 1924.
126

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

A MOMENTOUS CONVENTION
The year 1931 saw what was at the time the most extensive radio chain broadcast ever to air. A portion of
the momentous convention held July 24-30 in Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A., was transmitted via more than 450
radio stations in Australia, Canada, Europe, and the
United States. At this convention we adopted the
name Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Explaining the purpose of WBBR, The Watch
Tower of December 1, 1924, said: “We believe that the
radio is the most economical and e?ective way of
spreading the message of the truth that has yet been
used.” It then added: “If the Lord sees ?t to build
other radio stations for the spreading of the truth,
he will provide the money in his own good way.” (Ps.
127:1) By 1926, Jehovah’s people owned six radio
stations. Two were located in the United States
—WBBR in New York and WORD near Chicago.
The other four were in Canada, located in Alberta,
British Columbia, Ontario, and Saskatchewan.
15 This wide broadcasting of Bible truth did not
14

15, 16. (a) How did the clergy in Canada react to our broadcasts?
(b) How did radio lectures and the house-to-house work complement
each other?
METHODS OF PREACHING

127

go unnoticed by the clergy of Christendom. Albert
Ho?man, who was familiar with the work done at
the radio station in Saskatchewan, Canada, said:
“More and more people began to know of the Bible
Students [as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then called].
A wonderful witness was given until 1928, when the
clergy put pressure on o?cials and all the stations in
Canada run by the Bible Students lost their licenses.”
16

Despite the closure of our radio stations in Can-

ada, Bible lectures continued to be transmitted on
commercial stations. (Matt. 10:23) To boost the effectiveness of those programs, The Watch Tower and
The Golden Age (now called Awake!) carried a list of
commercial stations that broadcast Bible truth so
that publishers calling from door to door could encourage people to listen to the lectures on their local stations. With what impact? The Bulletin of January 1931 says: “The radio work has been a real
stimulus to the friends in their canvassing from door
to door. Many reports have come to the o?ce telling us that persons have listened in and, because
128

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

of hearing the lectures given by Brother Rutherford, were very ready to take the books o?ered to
them.” The Bulletin described the radio broadcasts
and the house-to-house work as “the two great publicity branches of the Lord’s organization.”
During the 1930’s, opposition mounted against
our use of commercial radio stations. So in late 1937,
Jehovah’s people adapted to the changing circumstances. They withdrew from commercial broadcasting and focused even more on the house-to-house
ministry.1[1] Nevertheless, radio continued to play an
important role in spreading the Kingdom message in
some remote or politically isolated parts of the
world. For example, from 1951 to 1991, a station in
West Berlin, Germany, regularly broadcast Bible discourses so that those living in parts of what was
then East Germany could hear the Kingdom message. Starting in 1961 and for more than three decades afterward, a national radio station in Suriname, South America, broadcast a weekly 15-minute
17

1[1] In 1957, those taking the lead decided to shut down WBBR
in New York, the last of our radio stations.

17, 18. Although circumstances changed, how did radio continue to
play a role?
METHODS OF PREACHING

129

program that spread Bible truths. From 1969 to 1977,
the organization produced more than 350 recorded
radio programs in the series “All Scripture Is Bene?cial.” In the United States, 291 radio stations, in 48
states, carried the programs. In 1996, a radio station
in Apia, the capital city of the South Paci?c nation
of Samoa, transmitted a weekly program entitled
“Answers to Your Bible Questions.”
18

As the 20th century drew to a close, radio no

longer played a primary role in spreading the good
news. However, another technology emerged that
made it possible to reach an audience of unprecedented size.
19

The Internet. As of 2013, more than 2.7 billion

people, almost 40 percent of the world’s population,
were connected to the Internet. According to certain
estimates, some two billion access it on mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. That ?gure
continues to climb globally, but the fastest growth
in mobile Internet connection is currently occurring
in Africa, where there are more than 90 million
19, 20. Why have Jehovah’s people produced jw.org, and how e?ective
has it been? (See also the box “JW.ORG.”)
130

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

s

VISITS:
Each day jw.org receives more than
750,000 individual visits

SITE LANGUAGES:
Ability to navigate in over 300 languages
PUBLICATIONS:
Available for download in more than 520 languages
D OWNLOADED EACH MONTH:
About 3 million short videos, 3 million complete
books, 4 million complete magazines, and 22 million
audio tracks
All ?gures as of 2013
mobile Internet subscriptions. Those developments
have fundamentally changed the way many people
receive information.
Starting in 1997, Jehovah’s people adopted this
method of mass communication. In 2013, the jw.org
Web site became available in some 300 languages,
and Bible-based information was made available for
download in over 520 languages. Each day the site
20

METHODS OF PREACHING

131

SOME METHODS USED TO REACH

LARGE NUMBERS
OF PEOPLE
1900
(Year indicates when
a particular method
began to be used)

1914
“Photo-Drama
of Creation”1 [2]
1910

1903
Newspaper sermons

1920

1933
Sound cars

1930

1922
Radio

1940
1936
Placard
work

1[2] The “Photo-Drama” included some motion pictures.

receives more than 750,000 individual visits. Each
month, in addition to viewing videos, people download over 3 million complete books, 4 million complete magazines, and 22 million audio tracks.
The Web site has become a powerful method of
spreading the good news of God’s Kingdom, even in
lands where our preaching work is restricted. For example, early in 2013, a man named Sina found the
jw.org site and called world headquarters, which is
located in the United States, asking for more information about the Bible. What made this call unusual? Sina comes from a Muslim background and lives
in a remote village in a country where the work of
Jehovah’s Witnesses is severely restricted. As a re21

21. What have you learned from the experience involving Sina?
132

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

1954
Motion pictures
1950

1960

1970

1997
Internet
1980

1990
1990
Videos

2000

A

2010

2011
Metropolitan
witnessing

sult of this call, arrangements were made for Sina to
study the Bible twice a week with a Witness in the
United States. The study was conducted using an Internet video service.
Teaching Individuals
22 None of the methods we have used to reach
large audiences, such as newspapers, the “PhotoDrama,” radio programs, and the Web site, were
meant to replace the door-to-door ministry. Why
not? Because Jehovah’s people learned from the pattern set by Jesus. He did more than preach to large
crowds; he focused on helping individuals. (Luke 19:
1-5) Jesus also trained his disciples to do the same,
and he gave them a message to deliver. (Read Luke
22, 23. (a) Have the methods of reaching large audiences replaced
the door-to-door ministry? (b) How has the King blessed our e?orts?
METHODS OF PREACHING

133

10:1, 8-11.) As discussed in Chapter 6, those taking
the lead have always encouraged each servant of Jehovah to speak to people face-to-face.—Acts 5:42;
20:20.
One hundred years after the Kingdom’s birth,
more than 7.9 million publishers actively share
in teaching others about God’s purposes. Without
question, the King has blessed the methods we have
used to advertise the Kingdom. As the following
chapter will show, he has also provided us with the
tools we need to spread the good news to every nation, tribe, and tongue.—Rev. 14:6.
23

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What events involving our use of newspapers,
picture presentations, radio, and the Internet
prove to you that the Kingdom is real?
? Why do we emphasize the door-to-door
ministry?

134

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

8

Tools for Preaching
Producing Literature
for the Worldwide Field

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Jehovah continues to provide us with the tools we need to
teach individuals from every nation, tribe, and tongue

VISITORS to Jerusalem could hardly believe what
they were hearing. Galileans were speaking foreign languages ?uently, and the message they were
conveying captivated their listeners. It was Pentecost 33 C.E., and the disciples had miraculously received the gift of speaking in various languages—proof that they had God’s backing. (Read
Acts 2:1-8, 12, 15-17.) The good news they preached
that day reached people of diverse backgrounds and
thereafter spread throughout the Roman Empire.
—Col. 1:23.
1, 2. (a) In the ?rst century, what helped to spread the good news
throughout the Roman Empire? (b) What evidence do we have of Jehovah’s backing in our time? (See the box “Good News in More Than
670 Tongues.”)
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

135

2

Today, God’s servants do not miraculously speak

in various languages. Even so, covering far more languages than in the ?rst century, they translate the
Kingdom message into over 670 languages. (Acts 2:
9-11) God’s people have produced literature in such
vast quantities and in so many languages that the
Kingdom message has penetrated every corner of the
globe.1[1] This too is unmistakable evidence that Jehovah is using the King Jesus Christ to direct our
preaching work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) As we review just
some of the tools we have used to accomplish this
work over the past 100 years, note how the King has
progressively trained us to be interested in individuals and has encouraged us to be teachers of God’s
Word.—2 Tim. 2:2.
The King Equips His S ervants to Plant S eeds of Truth
3 Jesus likened the “word of the Kingdom” to
seeds and a person’s heart to soil. (Matt. 13:18,
19) Just as a gardener may use a variety of tools
1[1] In the past decade alone, Jehovah’s people have produced
more than 20 billion Bible-based publications. In addition, our Web
site, jw.org, is now available to the more than 2.7 billion people
worldwide who access the Internet.

3. Why do we use a variety of tools in our preaching work?
136

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

G O OD NEWS
IN MORE THAN 670 TONGUES
IN 2000, the Governing Body authorized an unprecedented training program for all translation teams
worldwide. The ?rst step was the development of
a three-month course on English comprehension,
which was presented by 25 instructors to 1,944 translators, who were working in 182 language teams.
This course helped translators gain a complete understanding of the English text before starting to
translate it. Besides dealing with aspects of the English language, the course taught translators how to
analyze the text and be aware of such features as its
structure, tone, style, purpose, and intended audience.
A second course was developed in 2001 by a pool of
experienced translators. This course focuses on speci?c translation techniques. All the translation teams
around the world have now been put through this
training program.
In addition to organizing the training courses, the
Governing Body established a Translator Help Desk.
Whenever a translation team needs help in understanding the source text or is not sure about how a
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

137

translation technique should be applied in a speci?c
case, they can electronically submit their question to
this desk. When the question raised is editorial in nature, the Translator Help Desk consults with the compiler, or main editor, of the publication. Once a question is answered, it automatically becomes available
not just to the team that originated it but to all translation teams around the world that are working on
that same publication. The answer is stored in a database that any translator can easily access. In that way,
any team facing similar translation problems can bene?t from the direction given.
How has this training helped the translators? One
said: “The training we have received grants us the
freedom to explore techniques for handling the original text, but it also sets reasonable boundaries that
prevent us from taking over the role of the writer.
Now we feel like fully equipped explorers ready to
take on a challenge every day, knowing well where to
go, what alternate routes to take, and when to stop.”
As of 2013, more than 2,700 translators were working in over 190 locations to help spread the good news
in more than 670 tongues. This remarkable work
is possible only because it has the backing of the
King Jesus Christ.—Matt. 28:19, 20; Rev. 14:6.
138

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

to soften the soil and prepare it to receive seed, Jehovah’s people have used a variety of tools that have
helped them prepare the hearts of millions to receive
the Kingdom message. Some of those tools were useful for a limited time. Others, such as books and
magazines, continue to do valuable work. Unlike
most of the methods of mass communication mentioned in the preceding chapter, all the tools discussed here have helped Kingdom publishers contact
people face-to-face.—Acts 5:42; 17:2, 3.
Recorded talks. In the 1930’s and into the 1940’s,
publishers used recorded Bible lectures played on
portable phonographs. Each recording lasted less
than ?ve minutes. Sometimes the records had short
titles, such as “Trinity,” “Purgatory,” and “Kingdom.” How were those records used? Brother Clayton Woodworth, Jr., who was baptized in 1930 in the
United States, said: “I carried a little suitcase-type
phonograph, spring wound, with a portable arm that
I had to set in just the right position at the edge
of the record if it was to play properly. I would
approach a door, open the case, set the arm in
4

4, 5. How were phonograph records used, but what did they lack?
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

139

place, and push the doorbell. When the householder
opened the door, I would say, ‘I have an important
message I would like you to hear.’ ” What was the response? “Many times,” says Brother Woodworth,
“the person responded favorably. At other times,
people just shut the door. Occasionally, they thought
that I was selling phonographs.”
5

By 1940, over 90 di?erent recorded talks were

available and over a million records had been made.
John E. Barr, who was pioneering in Britain at that
time and who later served on the Governing Body,
said: “During the years 1936 to 1945, a phonograph
was my constant companion. In fact, in those days I
felt lost without one. To hear Brother Rutherford’s
voice at the doorstep was ever so encouraging; it felt
as though he were there in person. Of course, phonograph work still lacked the teaching aspect of the
ministry, the ability to touch the hearts of people.”
6

Testimony cards. Beginning in 1933, publishers

were encouraged to use testimony cards in their
door-to-door ministry. A testimony card was about
6, 7. (a) What were the bene?ts and the limitations of using testimony cards? (b) In what sense has Jehovah ‘put words in our mouths’?
140

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

three by ?ve inches in size. It contained a brief Bible message and a description of Bible-based literature that the householder could obtain. A publisher
would simply hand the card to the householder
and ask him to read it. “I welcomed the testimony
card work,” said Lilian Kammerud, who eventually
served as a missionary in Puerto Rico and Argentina.
Why was that? “Not all of us could give a good presentation,” she said. “So it helped me get accustomed
to approaching people.”
7

Brother David Reusch, who was baptized in 1918,

observed, “Testimony cards helped the brothers, for
very few felt that they were able to say the right
thing.” This tool had its limits, though. “Sometimes,” said Brother Reusch, “we met people who
thought we could not speak. In a sense, many of us
were not able to speak. But Jehovah was preparing
us to meet the public as his ministers. Soon he
would put words in our mouth by teaching us to use
the Scriptures at the door. This was accomplished
through the Theocratic Ministry School that began
in the 1940’s.”—Read Jeremiah 1:6-9.
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

141

Books. Since 1914, Jehovah’s people have produced over 100 di?erent books that discuss Bible
topics. Some of those books were speci?cally designed to train publishers to be e?ective ministers.
Anna Larsen, in Denmark, who has been a publisher for some 70 years, says: “Jehovah helped us to be
more e?ective publishers by means of the Theocratic Ministry School and the associated books we received. I remember that the ?rst of those books was
the Theocratic Aid to Kingdom Publishers, released in
1945. It was followed by “Equipped for Every Good
Work,” published in 1946. Now we have Bene?t From
Theocratic Ministry School Education, published in
2001.” Certainly, the Theocratic Ministry School and
related books have played a key role as Jehovah has
“adequately quali?ed us to be ministers.” (2 Cor. 3:
5, 6) Are you enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry
School? Do you bring the Ministry School book to the
meeting each week and follow along as the school
overseer refers to it? If you do, you will be allowing
Christ to train you to be a better teacher.—2 Cor.
9:6; 2 Tim. 2:15.
8

8. How can you allow Christ to train you?
142

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Jehovah has also assisted us by having his organization provide books that help publishers to explain basic Bible teachings. The Truth That Leads to
Eternal Life was a particularly e?ective book. It was
?rst published in 1968 and had an immediate impact.
“Demand for the Truth book has been so heavy,”
stated the November 1968 Kingdom Ministry, “that in
September the Society’s Brooklyn factory added a
special night shift.” The article went on to explain:
“At one time during August the demand for Truth
books exceeded the supply by over one and a half
million copies!” By 1982, over 100 million copies of
the book had been published in 116 languages. In
the 14 years from 1968 to 1982, the Truth book
helped to add over one million Kingdom publishers
to our ranks.1[2]
9

In 2005, another outstanding Bible study aid,
What Does the Bible Really Teach?, was released. Some
10

1[2] Some other Bible study aids that have helped publishers
teach Bible truth are The Harp of God (published in 1921), “Let God
Be True” (published in 1946), You Can Live Forever in Paradise on
Earth (published in 1982), and Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting
Life (published in 1995).

9, 10. What role have books played in planting and watering seeds of
truth?
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

143

WORLD RECORDS FOR PUBLICATIONS
TOTAL NUMBER OF B O OKS PUBLISHED
Bible
All Bible translations
(in whole or in part)
combined [1]

Over 5 billion

King James Version [2]

1 billion

New International Version [3]
New World Translation

Over 400 million

[4]

Over 201 million

Other books
Estimated at more than 1 billion

Quotations From Chairman
Mao Tse-tung [1]
What Does the Bible Really
Teach? [4]

Over 201 million

NUMBER OF LANGUAGES INTO WHICH A TEXT IS TRANSLATED
Listen to God
and Live Forever [4]

477

Universal Declaration
of Human Rights [5]

413

Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! [4]

359

Would You Like
to Know the Truth? [4] (tract)

364

MO ST PUBLISHED AND WIDELY TRANSLATED MAGAZINES
45.9 million per month in 212
languages

The Watchtower [4]

44.7 million per month in 99 languages

Awake! [4]
AARP The Magazine [6]
Liahona [7]

22 million bimonthly in English only
About 500,000; at times, nearly 50 languages

[1] Source: Guinness World Records
[2] Source: King James Bible Trust
[3] Source: Biblica Fact Sheet
[4] Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses, as
of January 2014

[5] Source: United Nations Universal
Declaration of Human Rights Web
site, as of October 2013
[6] Source: AARP
[7] Published by the Mormons

200 million copies have already been published in
256 languages! With what e?ect? In just seven years,
from 2005 to 2012, about 1.2 million people became
publishers of the good news. During that same period, the number of people studying the Bible with us
climbed from about 6 million to more than 8.7 million. Without a doubt, Jehovah is blessing our e?orts
to plant and water seeds of Kingdom truth.—Read
1 Corinthians 3:6, 7.
11

Magazines. Originally, the target audience for

The Watch Tower was primarily the “little ?ock,”
those with “the heavenly calling.” (Luke 12:32; Heb.
3:1) On October 1, 1919, Jehovah’s organization released another magazine, which was designed to appeal to a di?erent audience, the public. That magazine became so popular with the Bible Students and
the public that for many years its circulation was far
greater than that of The Watch Tower. That magazine
was ?rst named The Golden Age. In 1937, the name
was changed to Consolation. Then, in 1946, it became
known as Awake!
11, 12. In harmony with the cited scriptures, what audiences were our
magazines designed to reach?
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

145

Over the decades, the style and format of The
Watchtower and the Awake! have changed, but the pur12

pose has remained the same—to advertise God’s
Kingdom and build faith in the Bible. Today, The
Watchtower is produced in a study edition and a public edition. The “domestics” are the intended audience for the study edition—that is, both the “little
?ock” and the “other sheep.”1[3] (Matt. 24:45; John
10:16) The public edition is prepared especially for
those who do not yet know the truth but who have
a respect for the Bible and for God. (Acts 13:16)
Awake! focuses on those who know little about the
Bible and the true God, Jehovah.—Acts 17:22, 23.
13

By the beginning of 2014, each month more

than 44 million copies of Awake! and some 46 million copies of The Watchtower were published. Awake!
was translated into some 100 languages, and The
Watchtower, into over 200, which made them the
most widely translated and distributed magazines on
1[3] See the July 15, 2013, issue of The Watchtower, page 23, paragraph 13, which discusses our clari?ed understanding of who make
up the “domestics.”

13. What do you ?nd remarkable about our magazines? (Discuss the
chart “World Records for Publications.”)
146

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

earth! As remarkable as those achievements are, they
should not surprise us. These magazines contain the
message that Jesus said would be preached in all the
inhabited earth.—Matt. 24:14.
The Bible. In 1896, Brother Russell and his associates changed the name of the corporation they
used to publish literature so that it included the
word Bible; it became known as the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. That change was appropriate
because the Bible has always been the primary tool
for spreading the good news about the Kingdom.
(Luke 24:27) In harmony with the legal corporation’s
name, God’s servants have zealously promoted the
distribution and reading of the Bible. For example,
in 1926, we printed on our own presses The Emphatic
Diaglott, a translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures produced by Benjamin Wilson. Beginning in
1942, we printed and distributed some 700,000 copies of the entire King James Version. Just two years
later, we began printing the American Standard Version, which uses Jehovah’s name in 6,823 places. By
1950, we had distributed over 250,000 copies.
14

14. What have we zealously promoted, and why?
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

147

15

The year 1950 saw the release of the New World

Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures. The com15, 16. (a) What do you appreciate about the New World Translation? (Discuss the box “Speeding Up Bible Translation.”) (b) How can
you allow Jehovah to touch your heart?

SPEEDING UP BIBLE TRANSLATION
BY 1989, the New World Translation had been published,
in whole or in part, in 11 languages. To help ?ll the
growing need for the New World Translation, the Writing
Committee of the Governing Body arranged for training
courses to help translators approach the work systematically and ef?ciently. The MEPS Programming department developed a computer program called the Bible
Translation System.1[4] This program does not translate
the text, but it does help translators to organize their
work and easily access reference material. Devoted translators, trainers, and support personnel have worked hard
to help produce Bibles in language after language.
As a result of those e?orts, by 2004 the New World
Translation was available in over 50 languages! Just nine
years later, in 2013, there were 121 language editions of
the New World Translation available, and the number continues to grow.
1[4] The Bible Translation System is now part of a program
called Watchtower Translation System, which is used worldwide
by thousands of translators.
148

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

plete New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures was
released in one volume in 1961. This translation honors Jehovah by restoring his name to the locations
where it appeared in the original Hebrew text. The
120
110
100
90

T R A N S L AT I O N
FIGURES

80
70

50
?

Complete New World Translation

?

Christian Greek Scriptures

40
30
20
10
0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

LANGUAGES

60

divine name also appears 237 times in the main text
of the Christian Greek Scriptures. To ensure that it
is as accurate and readable as possible, the New World
Translation has been revised several times, most recently in 2013. As of 2013, more than 201 million
copies of the New World Translation have been published in whole or in part in 121 languages.
16

How have some responded to reading the New

World Translation in their own language? A Nepali
man said: “For many, the old Nepalese translation
that we had was di?cult to understand, since it used
classical language. But now we can understand the
Bible so much better, as it uses the language of
everyday life.” When a woman in the Central African Republic began reading the Sango translation,
she started to cry and said, “This is the language of
my heart.” Like that woman, each of us can allow Jehovah to touch our heart by reading his Word every
day.—Ps. 1:2; Matt. 22:36, 37.
17

Grateful for the Tools and Training
Do you appreciate the tools and progressive

17. How can you show that you appreciate the tools and training that
you receive, and what will be the result if you do so?
150

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

training that the King Jesus Christ has given us? Do
you make time to read the literature God’s organization produces, and do you use it to help others? If
so, you will relate to the comments of Sister Opal
Betler, who was baptized on October 4, 1914. Opal
said: “Through the years, my husband [Edward] and
I used the phonograph and the testimony cards. We
witnessed from house to house with books, booklets,
and magazines. We went on campaigns and marches and distributed printed proclamations. Later we
were trained to make back-calls [now referred to as
return visits] and hold Bible studies in the homes of
interested persons. It has been a busy and happy
life.” Jesus promised that his subjects would be busy
sowing, reaping, and rejoicing together. Millions like
Opal can testify to the truthfulness of that promise.
—Read John 4:35, 36.
Many who are not yet servants of the King
might consider God’s people to be “uneducated and
ordinary.” (Acts 4:13) But just think! The King has
caused his ordinary people to become a publishing
powerhouse, producing some of the most widely
18

18. What privilege do we have?
TOOLS FOR PREACHING

151

translated and distributed publications in history!
More important, he has trained and motivated us to
use these tools to spread the good news to people of
all nations. What a privilege we have to work with
Christ in planting seeds of truth and harvesting disciples!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How does our translation work prove that we
have the King’s backing?
? What facts about our publications prove to
you that the Kingdom is real?
? What can you do to show appreciation for the
tools that the King provides?

152

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

9

Results of Preaching
“The Fields . . . Are White
for Harvesting”

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Jehovah has made the seeds of Kingdom truth grow

THE disciples are puzzled. Jesus has told them: “Lift
up your eyes and view the ?elds, that they are white
for harvesting.” They gaze in the direction to which
Jesus gestures, but all they see are ?elds that are, not
white, but green—the color of recently sprouted
barley. ‘What harvest?’ they likely reason. ‘It will
take months before the harvest takes place.’—John
4:35.
2

Jesus, though, is not speaking about a literal har-

vest. Instead, he is using this occasion to teach his
disciples two important lessons concerning a spiritual harvest—a harvest of people. What are those lessons? To ?nd out, let us consider the account in
more detail.
1, 2. (a) Why are the disciples puzzled? (b) Jesus speaks about what
type of harvest?
RESULTS OF PREACHING

153

3

A Call to Action and a Promise of Joy
Jesus’ conversation with his disciples occurred at

the end of 30 C.E., near the Samaritan town of Sychar. While his disciples entered the town, Jesus
stayed behind at a well where he shared spiritual
truths with a woman who quickly grasped the importance of his teachings. When the disciples returned to Jesus, the woman hurried o? to Sychar
to tell her neighbors the amazing things she had
learned. Her report aroused great interest, and many
of her neighbors rushed toward the well to meet Jesus. Possibly at that moment—as Jesus gazed beyond
the ?elds into the distance and saw a crowd of Samaritans approaching—he stated: “View the ?elds,
that they are white for harvesting.”1[1] Then, to clarify that he meant, not a literal harvest, but a spiritual one, Jesus added: “The reaper is . . . gathering
fruit for everlasting life.”—John 4:5-30, 36.
1[1] Jesus’ remark about ‘the ?elds being white’ could allude to
the white robes that may have been worn by the crowd of Samaritans whom Jesus saw approaching.

3. (a) What possibly prompted Jesus to say: “The ?elds . . . are white
for harvesting”? (See footnote.) (b) How did Jesus clarify his statement?
154

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

What two important lessons about the spiritual
harvest did Jesus teach? First, the work is urgent. His
declaration that “the ?elds . . . are white for harvesting” was a call to action for his followers. To impress
upon his disciples the degree of urgency, Jesus added: “Already the reaper is receiving wages.” Yes, the
harvest had already begun—there was no time for delay! Second, the workers are joyful. Sowers and reapers will “rejoice together,” said Jesus. (John 4:35b,
36) Just as Jesus himself must have rejoiced on seeing that “many of the Samaritans . . . put faith in
him,” so his disciples would experience deep joy as
they worked whole-souled in the harvest. (John 4:3942) This ?rst-century account has special meaning
for us because it illustrates what is happening today
during the greatest spiritual harvest of all time.
When did this modern-day harvest begin? Who have
a share in it? What have been the results?
4

5

Our King Takes the Lead
in the Greatest Harvest of All T ime
In a vision given to the apostle John, Jehovah

4. (a) What two lessons about the harvest did Jesus teach? (b) What
questions will we consider?
5. Who takes the lead in the global harvest, and how does John’s vision indicate that the work is urgent?
RESULTS OF PREACHING

155

reveals that he assigned Jesus to take the lead in a
global harvest of people. (Read Revelation 14:14-16.)
In this vision, Jesus is described as having a crown
and a sickle. The “golden crown on [ Jesus’] head”
con?rms his position as ruling King. The “sharp
sickle in his hand” con?rms his role as Harvester. By
stating through an angel that “the harvest of the
earth is fully ripe,” Jehovah emphasizes that the work
is urgent. Indeed, “the hour has come to reap”—there
is no time for delay! In response to God’s command
“put your sickle in,” Jesus thrusts in his sickle, and
the earth is reaped—that is, people of the earth are
reaped. This exciting vision reminds us that again
“the ?elds . . . are white for harvesting.” Does this
vision help us to determine when this global harvest
began? Yes!
6

Since John’s vision in Revelation chapter 14 shows

Jesus, the Harvester, wearing a crown (verse 14), his
appointment as King in 1914 had already taken place.
(Dan. 7:13, 14) Sometime after that, Jesus is commanded to start the harvest (verse 15). The same order of
6. (a) When did “the harvest season” begin? (b) When did the actual
“harvest of the earth” begin? Explain.
156

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

events is seen in Jesus’ parable about the harvest of the
wheat, where he states: “The harvest is a conclusion of
a system of things.” Thus, the harvest season and the
conclusion of this system of things began at the same
time—in 1914. Later “in the harvest season,” the actual harvesting began. (Matt. 13:30, 39) Looking back
from our vantage point in time, we can see that the
harvest began some years after Jesus started ruling as
King. First, from 1914 until the early part of 1919, Jesus carried out a cleansing work among his anointed
followers. (Mal. 3:1-3; 1 Pet. 4:17) Then, in 1919, “the
harvest of the earth” began. Without delay, Jesus used
the newly appointed faithful slave to help our brothers
see the urgency of the preaching work. Consider what
happened.
7

In July 1920, The Watch Tower stated: “It seems

evident from an examination of the Scriptures that
a great privilege is granted unto the church in delivering a message concerning the kingdom.” For instance, Isaiah’s prophetic words helped the brothers
to see that the Kingdom news had to be announced
7. (a) What examination helped our brothers to see the urgency of
the preaching work? (b) What were our brothers encouraged to do?
RESULTS OF PREACHING

157

worldwide. (Isa. 49:6; 52:7; 61:1-3) How such a work
could be accomplished they did not know, but they
trusted that Jehovah would open the way for them.
(Read Isaiah 59:1.) As a result of this clearer view
about the urgency of the preaching work, our brothers were encouraged to step up their activities. How
did the brothers respond?
8

In December 1921, The Watch Tower announced:

“It has been the best year of all; and greater numbers of people have heard the message of truth during 1921 than in any previous year.” The magazine
added: “There is much yet to be done. . . . Let us
do it with a joyful heart.” Note how the brothers
grasped the same two important facts about the
preaching work that Jesus had impressed upon his
apostles: The work is urgent, and the workers are joyful.
9

During the 1930’s, after the brothers understood

that a great crowd of other sheep would respond to
8. In 1921, what two facts about the preaching work did our brothers
grasp?
9. (a) In 1954, what did The Watchtower state about the harvest
work, and why? (b) What worldwide increase in publishers has taken
place during the past 50 years?
158

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

the Kingdom message, the preaching work intensi?ed further. (Isa. 55:5; John 10:16; Rev. 7:9) The result? The number of those preaching the Kingdom
message rose from 41,000 in 1934 to 500,000 in 1953!
The Watchtower of December 1, 1954, rightly concluded: “It is Jehovah’s spirit and the power of his Word
that have accomplished this great world-wide harvest.”1[2]—Zech. 4:6.
The Result of the Harvest
—Foretold in Vivid Word Pictures
10 In his Kingdom parables, Jesus foretold in vivid language the result of the harvest work. Let us
consider the parable about the mustard grain and
the one about the leaven. We will focus particularly
on how they have been ful?lled in the time of the
end.
The parable of the mustard grain. A man plants a
mustard grain. It then grows into a tree in which
birds ?nd shelter. (Read Matthew 13:31, 32.) What
11

1[2] To learn more about those years and the decades that followed, we encourage you to read pages 425-520 of the book
Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom, which relate
what the harvest work accomplished from 1919 to 1992.

10, 11. In the parable of the mustard grain, what aspects of the seed’s
growth are highlighted?
RESULTS OF PREACHING

159

aspects of the growth of the seed are highlighted in
this parable? (1) The extent of the growth is amazing. “The tiniest of all the seeds” becomes a tree
with “great branches.” (Mark 4:31, 32) (2) Growth is
assured. “When [the seed] has been sown, it grows.”
Jesus does not say, “It may grow.” No, he states: “It
grows.” Its growth is unstoppable. (3) The growing tree attracts visitors and provides lodging. “The
birds of heaven come” and “?nd lodging under its
shadow.” How do these three aspects apply to the
modern-day spiritual harvest?
12

(1) Extent of growth: The parable highlights the

growth of the Kingdom message and the Christian
congregation. Since 1919, zealous harvest workers
have been gathered into the restored Christian congregation. At that time, the number of workers was
small, but it grew rapidly. In fact, its growth from
the early 1900’s to today has been phenomenal. (Isa.
60:22) (2) Assurance: The growth of the Christian
congregation has been unstoppable. No matter how
many layers of rocklike opposition God’s enemies
12. How does the parable of the mustard grain apply to today’s harvest?
160

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

placed upon the tiny seed, it kept growing—pushing
aside all obstacles. (Isa. 54:17) (3) Lodging: “The birds
of heaven” that ?nd lodging in the tree represent
many millions of righthearted individuals from some
240 lands who have responded to the Kingdom message by becoming part of the Christian congregation.
(Ezek. 17:23) There they receive spiritual food, refreshment, and protection.—Isa. 32:1, 2; 54:13.
13

The parable of the leaven. After a woman adds

some leaven to a mass of ?our, the leaven ferments
the whole mass. (Read Matthew 13:33.) What aspects
of growth are highlighted in this parable? Let us consider two. (1) Growth causes transformation. The
leaven spread “until the whole mass was fermented.”
(2) Growth is pervasive. The leaven ferments all
“three large measures of ?our”—the entire mass.
How do these two aspects apply to the modern-day
spiritual harvest?
14

(1) Transformation: The leaven stands for the

Kingdom message, and the mass of ?our represents
mankind. As leaven causes a change in ?our after the
13. The parable of the leaven highlights what aspects of growth?
14. How does the parable of the leaven apply to today’s harvest?
RESULTS OF PREACHING

161

two are mixed together, so the Kingdom message
causes a transformation in the hearts of individuals
after they accept that message. (Rom. 12:2) (2) Pervasive: The spreading of the leaven stands for the
spreading of the Kingdom message. Leaven works its
way through the dough until it has spread throughout the entire mass. Similarly, the Kingdom message
has spread “to the most distant part of the earth.”
(Acts 1:8) This aspect of the parable also indicates
that even in lands where our work is under ban, the
Kingdom message will spread, though our preaching
activities in those parts of the earth may largely go
unnoticed.
15

Some 800 years before Jesus spoke those par-

ables, Jehovah, by means of Isaiah, foretold in memorable language the scope of the modern-day spiritual harvest and the joy this harvest would cause.1[3]
Jehovah describes people “from far away” stream1[3] For more details about this colorful prophecy, see Isaiah’s
Prophecy—Light for All Mankind II, pages 303-320.

15. How have the words found at Isaiah 60:5, 22 been ful?lled? (See
also the boxes “Jehovah Made It Possible,” pages 164-165, and “How
‘the Small One’ Has B ecome ‘a Mighty Nation,’ ” pages 171-173.)
162

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ing toward his organization. Directing himself to a
“woman,” who today is represented by the anointed
remnant on earth, he states: “You will see and become radiant, and your heart will throb and over?ow,
because the wealth of the sea will be directed to you;
the resources of the nations will come to you.” (Isa.
60:1, 4, 5, 9) How true those words are! Today, longtime servants of Jehovah are indeed radiant with joy
as they observe how the number of Kingdom publishers in their lands has increased from just a few
to many thousands.
Why All S ervants of Jehovah Have Reason to Rejoice
16 You will recall that Jesus told his apostles: “The
reaper is . . . gathering fruit for everlasting life, so
that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.”
(John 4:36) How do we “rejoice together” in the global harvest? In several ways. Let us consider three.
17

First, we rejoice to see Jehovah’s role in the

work. When we preach the Kingdom message, we
sow seed. (Matt. 13:18, 19) When we help someone
16, 17. What is one reason why ‘the sower and the reaper rejoice together’? (See also the box “How Two Tracts Touched Two Hearts in
the Amazon.”)
RESULTS OF PREACHING

163

JEHOVAH MADE IT P O S SIBLE
JESUS declared: “Things impossible with men are possible
with God.” (Luke 18:27) Many of us have experienced the
truth of that statement. Despite all the e?orts of those who
want to stop the preaching work, Jehovah has helped us to
carry it out.

Zacharie Elegbe (aged 66, baptized in 1963) recalls how
a ban against the activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses in
Benin actually helped the brothers: “In 1976, when we
had 2,300 publishers, our work was banned and the
government ordered the ban to be broadcast in every
local language. That was unheard of. Though Benin’s population speaks more than 60 languages, radio programs back then were usually broadcast in
only ?ve. So when the ban was broadcast in all local
languages, many thousands of people living in remote
areas heard of us for the very ?rst time. They wondered, ‘Who are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and why are
they banned?’ Later, when we reached those areas,
many accepted the truth in short order.” Today, there
are more than 11,500 Witnesses in Benin.
Mariya Zinich (aged 74, baptized in 1957): “When I was
about 12 years old, our whole family was exiled from
Ukraine to Siberia, Russia. Despite all e?orts of the
government to silence us throughout the former So164

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

viet Union, our numbers kept increasing. Seeing that
amazing growth in spite of harsh opposition convinced me that this is Jehovah’s work. Nobody is able
to stop it!” Another sister named Mariya (aged 73,
baptized in 1960) noted: “As a result of deporting our
brothers to Siberia, the government caused many isolated people there to get a chance to hear the truth.”
Jesús Martín (aged 77, baptized in 1955) recalls: “When
I learned the truth, there were 300 Witnesses here
in Spain. In 1960, the repression against us became
brutal. The government ordered the police to snu?
out Jehovah’s Witnesses. At that time, it was hard
to imagine how we would ever be able to preach
the good news throughout the country. Everything
seemed to be stacked against us. But today, there are
nearly 111,000 Witnesses in Spain. Having witnessed
how that growth has taken place despite opposition
reinforces my conviction that with Jehovah on our
side, nothing is impossible!”

to become a disciple of Christ, we harvest fruitage.
And all of us feel deep joy as we observe with awe
how Jehovah causes Kingdom seed to “sprout and
grow tall.” (Mark 4:27, 28) Some seed that we scatter sprouts later and is harvested by others. You may
RESULTS OF PREACHING

165

HOW TWO TRACTS TOUCHED TWO
HEARTS IN THE AMAZON
A FAITHFUL 91-year-old Christian elder named Antônio Simões fondly remembers how his father and
his uncle found the truth by means of two tracts published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. “Do you want to hear
about it?” he asks his visitors. “We would love to,”
they say. Antônio’s kind eyes light up, and with a
smile he sits down to tell his story.
“My father, Zeno, was a Baptist preacher. In 1931,
he traveled to a remote part of the Amazon forest to
visit a church member. In her home, he noticed two
Bible tracts. She had found them in the church, but
she didn’t know who left them. One tract spoke about
hell; the other about the resurrection. Father was
touched by what he read. He immediately thought
about his brother-in-law, Guilherme, who had often
told him: ‘I don’t believe in hell?re. A God of love
couldn’t create such a place.’ Eager to show the tracts
to Guilherme, Father got into his canoe and paddled
for eight hours to Manaquiri, a settlement near Manaus, where Guilherme was living.
“After Father and Uncle Guilherme examined the
tracts, both said, ‘This is the truth!’ Right away, they
wrote to the branch o?ce in Brazil, asking for litera166

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ture. Father resigned as a pastor, and he and my uncle began sharing the Bible’s message in that isolated
area. The people responded so well that within a year
a congregation was formed in Manaquiri. Before long,
70 villagers attended the meetings, making it, at the
time, the largest congregation in Brazil.” Antônio
pauses. Then, he asks, “Isn’t it wonderful to hear
how the Kingdom message entered the Amazon?” Indeed, it is. Two tiny scattered seeds—two small Bible tracts—took root in the vast Amazon forest and
sprouted into a ?ourishing congregation. And today
the 83-year-old Manaquiri Congregation is no longer
the only congregation in Brazil’s Amazonas State, but
one of 143!

have had an experience similar to that of Joan, a
Christian sister in Britain who was baptized 60 years
ago. She said: “I have met individuals who told me
that I planted a seed in their heart when I preached
to them years ago. Unknown to me, other Witnesses
later studied the Bible with them and helped them
to become servants of Jehovah. I rejoice that the
seed I planted grew and was harvested.”—Read 1 Corinthians 3:6, 7.
RESULTS OF PREACHING

167

Second, we remain joyful workers when we keep
in mind that Paul stated: “Each person will receive
his own reward according to his own work.” (1 Cor.
3:8) The reward is given according to the work, not
according to the results of that work. How heartening that assurance is for those preaching in territories where there is little response! In God’s eyes,
every Witness who wholeheartedly shares in the sowing work is “bearing much fruit” and therefore has
reason to rejoice.—John 15:8; Matt. 13:23.
18

Third, we rejoice that our work ful?lls prophecy. Consider Jesus’ answer to his apostles when they
asked: “What will be the sign of your presence and
of the conclusion of the system of things?” He told
them that one feature of that sign would be a global preaching work. Was he speaking of the disciplemaking work? No. He said: “This good news of
the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited
earth for a witness.” (Matt. 24:3, 14) Thus, Kingdom
preaching—sowing seed—is a feature of the sign.
19

18. What reason for joy is mentioned at 1 Corinthians 3:8?
19. (a) How does Jesus’ prophecy found at Matthew 24:14 relate to
our joy? (b) What should we keep in mind even if we do not personally
succeed in making a disciple?
168

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Hence, as we preach the good news of the Kingdom,
we keep in mind that even if we do not succeed in
making a disciple, we do succeed in giving “a witness.”1[4] Yes, no matter how people respond, we
share in ful?lling Jesus’ prophecy and have the honor to serve as “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9)
What good reason to rejoice!
20

“From the Rising of the Sun to Its S etting”
In the ?rst century, Jesus helped his apostles to

see that the harvest work was urgent. From 1919 onward, Jesus has helped his modern-day disciples to
grasp the same truth. In response, God’s people have
intensi?ed their activities. In fact, the harvest work
has proved to be unstoppable. As foretold by the
prophet Malachi, the preaching work is being carried
out today “from the rising of the sun to its setting.”
(Mal. 1:11) Yes, from sunrise to sunset—from east to
west, no matter where they are on earth—sowers and
1[4] That vital truth was already understood by the early Bible
Students. Zion’s Watch Tower of November 15, 1895, stated: “If but
little wheat can be garnered, abundant testimony to the truth can at
least be borne. . . . All can preach the gospel.”

20, 21. (a) How are the words of Malachi 1:11 being ful?lled?
(b) As to the harvest work, what are you determined to do, and why?
RESULTS OF PREACHING

169

reapers work and rejoice together. And from sunrise
to sunset—from morning till evening, or all day
long—we work with a sense of urgency.
As we look back today over some 100 years and
see how a small group of God’s servants has grown
into “a mighty nation,” our heart does indeed “throb
and over?ow” with joy. (Isa. 60:5, 22) May that joy
and our love for Jehovah, “the Master of the harvest,” impel each one of us to keep on doing our
share in completing the greatest harvest of all time!
—Luke 10:2.
21

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What has the Kingdom accomplished in
relation to the spiritual harvest?
? How do the parables of the mustard grain and
the leaven encourage you to carry out your
ministry?
? What reasons do you have to rejoice in the
ministry?

170

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

HOW “THE SMALL ONE” HAS BECOME
“A MIGHTY NATION”
“THE little one will become a thousand and the small one a
mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own
time.” (Isa. 60:22) How has that prophecy come true? How has
its ful?llment a?ected longtime Witnesses around the world?

B örje Nilsson (aged 84, baptized in 1943): “I remember an anointed brother who was a colporteur in the
1920’s. When he received nearly half of Sweden as his
assignment, he obediently began preaching—and how
his work and that of other faithful ones has been rewarded! Today we have over 22,000 publishers. Though
I’m now up in years, I want to continue obediently in
Jehovah’s service. Who knows what surprises Jehovah
still has in store for us?”
Etienne Esterhuyse (aged 83, baptized in 1942): “Today, I
look back in wonderment as I see how the number of
Jehovah’s people in South Africa has grown from some
1,500 in 1942 to over 94,000 today. It is absolutely faithstrengthening to be part of such a vast organization!”
Keith Gaydon (aged 82, baptized in 1948): “Witnessing
how the number of publishers in Britain increased from
some 13,700 in 1948 to nearly 137,000 today demonstrates to me that this is Jehovah’s work. By human
171

power it would have been impossible, but Jehovah is
‘the One doing wonders.’ ”—Ex. 15:11.
Ulrike Krolop (aged 77, baptized in 1952): “After World
War II, the congregations in Germany were invigorated by the active spirit of the Witnesses who had endured Nazi persecution. People needed comfort, and
we could give it without hesitation because the Witnesses had not participated in that terrible war. Over
the past 60 years, I have observed how God’s spirit has
guided his people. Today we have over 164,000 Witnesses—what a wonderful result!”
Mariya Brinetskaya (aged 77, baptized in 1955): “To avoid
arrest, I was baptized at night under the cover of darkness. Later my husband was sent to a distant labor
camp for being a Witness. Cautiously, I continued
preaching in my village here in Russia, and several
neighbors accepted the truth. Back then, we had few
brothers and sisters. I rejoice that today there are over
168,000 Witnesses in Russia!”
Kimiko Yamano (aged 79, baptized in 1954): “When I
learned in 1970 that we had 10,000 publishers in Japan,
I could not hold back my tears of joy, and I was moved
to promise Jehovah anew, ‘As long as I live, I want to
be loyal to you.’ Imagine how happy I feel today, as we
now have more than 216,000 publishers!”
172

Daniel Odogun (aged 83): “When I was baptized in 1950,
Nigeria had 8,000 publishers. Today, there are some
351,000! At assemblies, I’m moved when I see so many
in attendance, and I think of Haggai 2:7. Jehovah is
really shaking the nations, and the precious things are
coming in. I still try to do as much as possible in the
preaching work because preaching is my way of saying,
‘Thank you, Jehovah!’ ”
Carlos Silva (aged 79): “We had 5,000 Witnesses in Brazil
when I was baptized in 1952. That year, we had an assembly in a gymnasium in S ão Paulo. There were two
cars in the parking lot. A brother pointed to the nearby Pacaembu Stadium and asked me, ‘Do you think
we’ll ever ?ll it?’ It seemed impossible, but in 1973 the
stadium was packed with 94,586 in attendance! Today
we have over 767,000 dear brothers and sisters in Brazil
—it’s marvelous to see the increase!”
Carlos Cázares (aged 73): “In 1954, the year I was baptized, there were 10,500 publishers in Mexico. The need
for workers was so great that I was appointed as a circuit overseer at the age of 21. It has been a blessing to
see the ful?llment of Isaiah 60:22 before my very eyes.
We now have more than 806,000 publishers, who are
conducting over one million Bible studies! It’s overwhelming!”
173

SECTION 3

K INGD OM S TANDARDS
Seeking God’s Righteousness
YOU wave to your neighbor as you walk by. Lately, you
have noticed that he has been observing you and your family. He waves back and then beckons you over. He says:
“May I just ask a question? What is it that makes you people so di?erent?” “What do you mean?” you ask. “Well,” he
says, “you are Jehovah’s Witnesses, right? You are not like
anybody else. You do not ?t in with the other religions
—you don’t celebrate the holidays, and you don’t get involved in politics and wars. None of you smoke. And your
family seems to have high moral standards. What is it that
makes you people so di?erent in so many ways?”
You know that the answer comes down to one thing: We
live under the rulership of God’s Kingdom. As King, Jesus
is ever re?ning us. He is helping us to walk in his footsteps
and thus to stand out as di?erent in this wicked world. In
this section, we will see how the Messianic Kingdom has
been re?ning God’s people spiritually, morally, and organizationally—all to Jehovah’s glory.

10

The King Refines His People
Spiritually

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Why and how Jesus has re?ned and cleansed
his followers spiritually

JESUS had great respect for the temple in Jerusalem
because he knew what it stood for. The temple had
long been the center of true worship on earth. But
that worship—the worship of the holy God, Jehovah—must be clean and pure. Imagine, then, how Jesus felt when he came to the temple on Nisan 10,
33 C.E., and found that it was being polluted. What
was happening?—Read Matthew 21:12, 13.
2 In the Court of the Gentiles, greedy merchants
and money changers were taking unfair advantage of
the worshippers who came to present o?erings to Jehovah.1[1] Jesus “threw out all those selling and
1[1] Visiting Jews had to use certain currency to pay the annual temple tax, and the money changers charged a fee to convert
coins into the required currency. Additionally, visitors might have
needed to buy animals for o?erings. Jesus called the merchants
“robbers,” likely because they charged exorbitant prices or fees for
their services.

1-3. What did Jesus do when he found that the temple was being polluted?
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

175

buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables
of the money changers.” (Compare Nehemiah 13:
7-9.) He denounced those sel?sh men for turning his
Father’s house into “a cave of robbers.” Jesus thereby showed his respect for the temple and what it represented. The worship of his Father had to be kept
clean!
Centuries later, after he was installed as Messianic King, Jesus again cleansed a temple—one that
involves all today who want to worship Jehovah acceptably. What temple did he then cleanse?
3

Cleansing “the S ons of Levi”
4 As we saw in Chapter 2 of this publication, after being enthroned in 1914, Jesus came with his Father to inspect the spiritual temple—the arrangement
for pure worship.1[2] As a result of that inspection,
the King saw that anointed Christians, “the sons of
Levi,” needed some re?ning and cleansing. (Mal. 3:
1-3) From 1914 to early 1919, the Re?ner, Jehovah,
1[2] Jehovah’s people on earth worship him in the earthly courtyards of his great spiritual temple.

4, 5. (a) How were Jesus’ anointed followers re?ned and cleansed
from 1914 to early 1919? (b) Was that the end of the re?ning and
cleansing for God’s people? Explain.
176

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

allowed his people to go through various trials and
hardships that served to re?ne and cleanse them.
Happily, those anointed ones emerged from the ?ery
tests in a cleaner condition, eager to show their support for the Messianic King!
5

Was that the end of the re?ning and cleansing for

God’s people? No. Throughout the last days, Jehovah by means of the Messianic King has continued
to help his followers to be clean so that they might
remain in the spiritual temple. In the next two chapters, we will see how he has re?ned them morally
and organizationally. First, though, let us discuss
spiritual cleansing. It is faith-strengthening to consider what Jesus has done—both in clearly recognizable
ways and behind the scenes—to help his followers to
be spiritually clean.
6

“Keep Yourselves Clean”
What is spiritual cleanness? To answer that, let

us examine the words that Jehovah spoke to Jewish
exiles as they were about to leave Babylon in the
6. How do Jehovah’s commands to the Jewish exiles help us to understand what spiritual cleanness involves?
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

177

sixth century B.C.E. (Read Isaiah 52:11.) Those exiles
were returning home to Jerusalem primarily to rebuild the temple and restore true worship. (Ezra 1:
2-4) Jehovah wanted his people to leave behind all
traces of Babylon’s religion. Notice that he gave
them a series of commands: “Touch nothing unclean,” “get out from the midst of her,” and “keep
yourselves clean.” Jehovah’s pure worship must not
be tainted by false worship. What, then, may we conclude? Spiritual cleanness involves keeping free of
the teachings and practices of false religion.
7

Shortly after he was installed as King, Jesus

put in place a clearly recognizable channel through
which he has helped his followers to be spiritually
clean. That channel is the faithful and discreet slave,
which Christ appointed in 1919. (Matt. 24:45) By
that year, the Bible Students had already cleansed
themselves of many false religious teachings. Still,
they needed some further cleansing spiritually.
Through his faithful slave, Christ has gradually enlightened his followers about various observances
7. Through what channel has Jesus helped his followers to be spiritually clean?
178

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

and practices that they needed to abandon. (Prov. 4:
18) Let us consider some examples of this.
Should Christians Celebrate Christmas?
The Bible Students long acknowledged that
Christmas has pagan roots and that Jesus was not
born on December 25. Zion’s Watch Tower of December 1881 stated: “Millions were brought into the
church from Paganism. But the change was mostly in
name, for the pagan priests became christian priests
and the pagan holidays came to be called by christian names—Christmas being one of these holidays.”
In 1883, under the title “When Was Jesus Born?” the
Watch Tower reasoned that Jesus was born about the
beginning of October.1[3] Yet, the Bible Students did
not at the time clearly see the need to stop celebrating Christmas. It continued to be celebrated even by
members of the Brooklyn Bethel family. After 1926,
however, things began to change. Why?
8

9

As a result of careful, closer scrutiny of the

1[3] This article noted that a winter date for Jesus’ birth “does
not comport well with the account of the shepherds being out with
their ?ocks.”—Luke 2:8.

8. What had the Bible Students long acknowledged about Christmas,
yet what did they not see clearly?
9. What did the Bible Students come to realize about Christmas?
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

179

subject, the Bible Students came to realize that the
origin of Christmas and the practices associated with
it actually dishonor God. The article “The Origin of
Christmas,” in The Golden Age of December 14, 1927,
noted that Christmas is a pagan celebration, focuses
on pleasures, and involves idol worship. The article
made it clear that the celebration was not ordered by
Christ and concluded with this pointed statement
about Christmas: “The fact that the world, the ?esh,
and the Devil are in favor of its perpetuation and
observance . . . is a ?nal and conclusive argument
against its celebration by those who are dedicated
wholly to the service of Jehovah.” Not surprisingly,
the Bethel family did not celebrate Christmas that
December—or ever again!
10

The following year, the Bible Students received

an even more thorough exposé of Christmas. On December 12, 1928, Brother Richard H. Barber, a member of the headquarters sta?, gave a radio discourse
10. (a) What thorough expos é of Christmas was presented in December 1928? (See also the box “Christmas, Its Origin and Purpose.”)
(b) How were God’s people alerted to other holidays and celebrations
that should be avoided? (See the box “Exposing Other Holidays and
Celebrations.”)
180

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

that laid bare the unclean origins of this holiday.
How did God’s people respond to the clear direction
from headquarters? Recalling when he and his family stopped celebrating Christmas, Brother Charles
Brandlein said: “Did we mind putting those pagan
things away? Absolutely not! . . . It was just like taking a soiled garment o? and throwing it away.” Re?ecting a similar spirit, Brother Henry A. Cantwell,
who later served as a traveling overseer, recalled:
“We were pleased that we were able to give up something to prove our love for Jehovah.” Christ’s loyal
followers were willing to make the needed changes
and have no part in a celebration that stemmed from
unclean worship.1[4]—John 15:19; 17:14.
What a ?ne example those faithful Bible Students set for us! Re?ecting on their example, we do
well to ask ourselves: ‘How do I view the direction
11

we receive from headquarters? Do I gratefully accept
1[4] In a personal letter dated November 14, 1927, Brother Frederick W. Franz wrote: “We will have no Christmas this year. The
Bethel family has voted not to have Christmas anymore.” A few
months later, in a letter dated February 6, 1928, Brother Franz
wrote: “Little by little the Lord is cleansing us from the errors of
the Devil’s Babylonish organization.”

11. How can we show our support for the Messianic King?
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

181

it and apply what I learn?’ Our willing obedience
shows our support for the Messianic King, who is
using the faithful slave to dispense timely spiritual
food.—Acts 16:4, 5.
Should Christians Use the Cross?
12 For many years, the Bible Students viewed the
cross as an acceptable symbol of Christianity. They
certainly did not feel that the cross should be worshipped, for they understood that idolatry is wrong.
(1 Cor. 10:14; 1 John 5:21) As early as 1883, the
Watch Tower frankly stated that “all idolatry is an
abomination to God.” Yet, at ?rst, the Bible Students
saw no objection to what they thought were appropriate uses of the cross. For example, they proudly
wore a cross-and-crown pin as an identifying badge.
To them it signi?ed that if they proved faithful to
death, they would receive the crown of life. Beginning in 1891, a cross-and-crown symbol appeared on
the cover of the Watch Tower.
13

The Bible Students cherished the cross-and-

12. For many years, how did the Bible Students view the cross?
13. What enlightenment did Christ’s followers receive about use of the
cross? (See also the box “Progressively Enlightened About Use of the
Cross.”)
182

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“CHRISTMAS, ITS ORIGIN
AND PURP O SE”
IN December 1928, Brother Richard H. Barber delivered a
powerful radio discourse on the subject of Christmas. The
content of that discourse was published in The Golden Age
of December 12, 1928, under the title “Christmas, Its Origin and Purpose.” Among the statements in the discourse
were the following:
? “Satan . . . has taught the people to give more prominence to the birth of the babe Jesus than to the death of the
man Jesus, in order to hide the importance of the ransom.”
? “Every one is aware of the spirit of frivolity, debauchery,
drunkenness and revelry so prevalent during the Christmas
season . . . Surely none of these things honor either Jehovah
God or His Son.”
? “The Devil has now succeeded in grafting his counterfeit festivals, feast days, fast days and holy days upon the
church . . . The Devil has succeeded in getting the people to
adopt all his wicked schemes and to give them the name
Christian, in order that thus he might mock the great Jehovah God.”

crown emblem. Starting in the late 1920’s, however,
Christ’s followers were progressively enlightened regarding the use of the cross. Re?ecting on the 1928
assembly held in Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A., Brother
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

183

Grant Suiter, who later served on the Governing
Body, recalled: “At the assembly the cross-and-crown
emblems were shown to be not only unnecessary but
objectionable.” Over the next few years, more enlightenment followed. It was clear that the cross has
no place in worship that is pure and spiritually
clean.
14 How did God’s people respond to the progressive enlightenment they received about the cross?
Did they continue to hold on to the cross-and-crown
emblem, which had been so dear to them? “We easily gave it up when we realized what it represented,”
recalled Lela Roberts, a longtime servant of Jehovah.
Another faithful sister, Ursula Serenco, expressed
the feelings of many, saying: “We came to recognize
that what we once cherished as symbolic or representative of the death of our Lord and of our Christian devotion was really a pagan symbol. In harmony with Proverbs 4:18, we were grateful that the path
was being more brightly illuminated.” Christ’s loyal
followers wanted to have no part in unclean false religious practices!
14. How did God’s people respond to the progressive enlightenment
they received about the cross?
184

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

EXP O SING OTHER HOLIDAYS
AND CELEBRATIONS
OVER the years, Christ has helped his followers to remain no
part of the world. Here are some of the earliest references that
alerted God’s people to various holidays and celebrations that
true Christians avoid.

? Easter. “The prominent heathen festival of Easter
was also brought over and engrafted into the so-called
Christian church.”—The Golden Age, December 12,
1928, page 168.
? Valentine’s Day. “St. Valentine’s Day has nothing very
saintly to commend it as to its origin.”—The Golden
Age, December 25, 1929, page 208.
? Birthdays. “There are but two such celebrations mentioned in the Scriptures, one of the heathen king
Pharaoh of Egypt, in the days of Joseph, and the other of [Herod,] whose birthday cost John the Baptist his
life. In the Bible there is no instance of celebrations of
birthdays by any of God’s people.”—The Golden Age,
May 6, 1936, page 499.
? New Year’s Day. “The whole New Year’s celebration
with its high jinks and drunken revelry is not Christian, regardless of the day on which it occurs. Early
Christians did not observe it.”—Awake! December 22,
1946, page 24.
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

185

We share that determination today. We recognize that Christ has been using a clearly recognizable channel—his faithful and discreet slave—to
help his people keep spiritually clean. Hence, when
the spiritual food we receive alerts us to observances, practices, or customs that are tainted by
false religion, we promptly and obediently respond.
Like our brothers and sisters who lived in the early
part of Christ’s presence, we are determined to keep
the earthly courtyards of Jehovah’s spiritual temple
clean.
15

Throughout the last days, Christ has also been
working behind the scenes to protect the congregations of Jehovah’s people from individuals who
could cause spiritual contamination. How has he
done so? Let us see.
16

S eparating “the Wicked From Among the Righteous”
17 The King Jesus Christ keeps a watchful eye on
the congregations of God’s people earth wide. In ways
15, 16. How can we show that we are determined to keep the earthly courtyards of Jehovah’s spiritual temple clean?
17, 18. In the illustration of the dragnet, what is the meaning of
(a) letting down the dragnet, (b) “gathering ?sh of every kind,” (c) collecting the ?ne ?sh into containers, and (d) throwing away the ?sh that
were not suitable?
186

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

PRO GRES SIVELY ENLIGHTENED AB OUT
USE OF THE CRO S S
? Cross-and-crown pins are not only unnecessary but also
objectionable.—Assembly in Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A.,
1928.
? Cross-and-crown pins are idols.—Preparation, 1933,
page 239.
? The cross is pagan in origin.—The Golden Age,
February 28, 1934, page 336.
? Jesus died on a stake, not on a cross.—The Golden Age,
November 4, 1936, page 72; Riches, 1936, page 27.
The Greek word stau·ros is translated “cross” in many Bible
translations. Notice, however, what various sources say about the
meaning of this word:
“The Greek word [stau·ros] properly . . . means merely a stake.”
—Cyclopedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature.
“A pole in the broadest sense. It is not the equivalent of a ‘cross.’”
—Cruci?xion in Antiquity.
“A strong stake, such as farmers drive into the ground to make
their fences or palisades—no more, no less.”—History of the Cross.
“It never means two pieces of timber placed across one another at
any angle, but always of one piece alone.”—The Companion Bible.
“An upright pale or stake . . . It never means two pieces of wood
joining each other at any angle.”—A Critical Lexicon and Concordance.
THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

187

that we cannot fully perceive, Christ and the angels
have been doing a separating work. Jesus described
this work in his illustration of the dragnet. (Read Matthew 13:47-50.) What does the illustration mean?
18

Letting “a dragnet . . . down into the sea.” The drag-

net represents the Kingdom preaching that is taking
place throughout the sea of humanity. “Gathering ?sh
of every kind.” The good news attracts people of all
kinds—those who take steps to become true Christians, as well as many others who may initially show
some interest but do not really take a stand for pure
worship.1[5] Collecting “the ?ne ones into containers.”
Honesthearted ones are gathered into containerlike
congregations, where they can render clean worship to
Jehovah. Throwing away “the unsuitable” ?sh. Throughout the last days, Christ and the angels have been separating “the wicked from among the righteous.”2[6] As
1[5] Consider, for example, that in 2013, there was a peak of
7,965,954 publishers, while 19,241,252 attended the annual observance of the Memorial of Christ’s death.
2[6] The separating of the ?ne ?sh from the unsuitable ?sh is not
the same as the separating of the sheep from the goats. (Matt.
25:31-46) The separating, or ?nal judgment, of the sheep and the
goats takes place during the coming great tribulation. Until then,
those who are like unsuitable ?sh may return to Jehovah and be
gathered into containerlike congregations.—Mal. 3:7.
188

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

a result, those who lack the right heart condition
—who are perhaps unwilling to abandon wrong beliefs
or practices—have not been allowed to taint the congregations.1[7]
Is it not reassuring to know that our King, Jesus
Christ, is protective of those under his care? And is
it not comforting to know that his zeal for true worship—and true worshippers—is as fervent today as it
was when he cleansed the temple in the ?rst century C.E.? How thankful we are that Christ has been
working to safeguard the spiritual cleanness of God’s
people and the purity of true worship! We can show
our support for the King and his Kingdom by avoiding all contact with false religion.
19

1[7] Eventually, the unsuitable ones will symbolically be cast into
a ?ery furnace, denoting their future destruction.

19. How do you feel about what Christ has been doing to safeguard
the cleanness of God’s people and the purity of true worship?

THE KING REFINES HIS PEOPLE SPIRITUALLY

189

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What is spiritual cleanness, and through what
channel has Christ helped his followers to be
spiritually clean?
? How did Christ use his faithful and discreet
slave to help his followers to abandon the
celebration of Christmas and the use of the
cross-and-crown emblem?
? How do you feel about what Christ has done
to safeguard true worship?

190

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

11

Moral Refinements
Reflecting God’s Holiness

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

How the King has taught his subjects to respect God’s moral
standards

WHAT if you could have an experience like that of
the prophet Ezekiel some 25 centuries ago? Imagine
this: You approach a vast, gleaming temple complex.
A mighty angel is there to show you this awesome
place! You climb the seven steps that lead up to one
of the three gates. These entrances ?ll you with awe.
They tower upward about 100 feet. Within the entryways, you see that there are guard chambers. The pillars feature an elegant palm-tree design.—Ezek. 40:
1-4, 10, 14, 16, 22; 41:20.
2

This is the visionary spiritual temple. Ezekiel de-

scribed it in such detail that his account ?lls chapters 40 through 48 of his prophetic book. This
1. What did Ezekiel see that ?lls us with awe?
2. (a) What does the visionary temple represent? (See also the footnote.) (b) What may we learn from features of the temple’s entrances?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

191

temple represents Jehovah’s arrangement for pure
worship. Every feature has meaning for our own
worship in these last days.1[1] What do the lofty gates
signify? They remind us that those who enter Jehovah’s arrangement for pure worship must live by
God’s lofty and upright standards. Even the carvings
of palm trees make a similar point, for palms are
sometimes used in the Bible to stand for uprightness.
(Ps. 92:12) And the guard chambers? Clearly, those
who fail to respect divine standards are refused entrance into this beautiful, life-giving way of pure
worship.—Ezek. 44:9.
3

How has Ezekiel’s vision been ful?lled? As we

noted in Chapter 2 of this book, Jehovah used Christ
to put his people through a special re?ning process
from 1914 to early 1919. Did the re?ning stop then?
Far from it! Throughout the past century, Christ has
1[1] In 1932, Volume 2 of the book Vindication ?rst showed that
the Bible prophecies focusing on the restoration of God’s people
to their homeland saw a modern-day ful?llment, not on ?eshly Israel, but on spiritual Israel. Those prophecies point to the restoration
of pure worship. The Watchtower of March 1, 1999, explained that
Ezekiel’s temple vision is such a restoration prophecy and therefore has an important spiritual ful?llment during the last days.

3. Why have Christ’s followers needed continual re?nement?
192

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

continued to uphold Jehovah’s holy standards of
conduct. His followers have thus needed continual
re?nement. Why? Because Christ has been gathering
his followers from this morally corrupt world and
Satan never stops trying to draw them back into the
mire of immorality. (Read 2 Peter 2:20-22.) Let us examine three areas in which true Christians have
steadily been re?ned. First, we will consider some
moral re?nements, then a vital provision for keeping
the congregation clean, and ?nally the family arrangement.
Moral Re?nements Through the Years
4 Jehovah’s people have always been keenly interested in moral, upright conduct. Hence, they have
embraced ever clearer instruction on the subject.
Consider a few examples.
Sexual immorality. Jehovah designed sexual relations between marriage mates to be clean and beautiful. Satan delights in wrenching that precious gift
from its proper context by twisting it into something
dirty and using it to tempt Jehovah’s people so that
they lose God’s favor. Satan used that tactic with
5

4, 5. Satan has long used what tactic, and with what success?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

193

tragic success back in the days of Balaam, and he has
been using it more than ever in these last days.
—Num. 25:1-3, 9; Rev. 2:14.
6

To counteract Satan’s e?orts, the June 15, 1908,

Watch Tower published a vow that included this commitment: “I will at all times and at all places, conduct myself toward those of the opposite sex in private exactly as I would do with them in public.”1[2]
Although the vow was not a requirement, many took
it and submitted their names to be published in
Zion’s Watch Tower. Years later, it was rightly seen
that this vow, while helpful to many in its time, was
becoming a mere ritual; so it fell into disuse. However, the high moral principles it represented were
always upheld.
7

Satan’s attacks only intensi?ed. The March 1,

1[2] The vow prohibited a man and a woman from being alone in
a room together unless the door was left wide open—or unless they
were marriage mates or close family members. For some years, this
vow was recited daily as part of the Morning Worship program at
Bethel.

6. What vow was published in the Watch Tower, how was it used, and
why did it eventually fall into disuse? (See also the footnote.)
7. In 1935, The Watchtower addressed what problem, and what standard did it rea?rm?
194

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

1935, issue of The Watchtower squarely addressed a
growing problem among God’s people. Some evidently thought that sharing in the ministry somehow
exempted them from holding to Jehovah’s moral
standards in their private life. The Watchtower pointedly stated: “One should remember that merely engaging in the witness work is not all that is required.
Jehovah’s witnesses are his representatives, and the
obligation rests upon them to properly represent
Jehovah and his kingdom.” The article then gave
clear counsel about marriage and sexual morals, thus
helping God’s people to “?ee from sexual immorality.”—1 Cor. 6:18.
8

In more recent decades, The Watchtower has re-

peatedly stressed the proper de?nition of the word
used in the Greek Scriptures for sexual immorality
—por·neia. The meaning is not limited to the act of
sexual intercourse. Rather, por·neia includes a wide
variety of immoral acts, generally encompassing all
the lewd acts carried out in houses of prostitution.
Christ’s followers have thus been protected from the
8. Why has The Watchtower repeatedly stressed the full meaning of
the Greek word for sexual immorality?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

195

plague of sexual perversion that has overtaken so
many in today’s world.—Read Ephesians 4:17-19.
9

Alcohol abuse. The March 1, 1935, issue of The

Watchtower raised another moral issue: “It has likewise been noticed that some take part in the ?eld
service and perform other duties in the organization
while under the in?uence of [alcohol]. Under what
condition is the use of wine approved in the Scriptures? Would it be proper to use wine to the extent
that it a?ects one’s service in the Lord’s organization?”
10

The answer discussed the balanced view of alco-

holic beverages that is found in God’s Word. The Bible does not condemn the use of wine and other alcoholic drinks in moderation, but it does strongly
condemn drunkenness. (Ps. 104:14, 15; 1 Cor. 6:9, 10)
As to taking part in sacred service while under the
in?uence of alcohol, God’s servants have long been
reminded of the account about Aaron’s sons, whom
God put to death for o?ering illegitimate ?re upon
God’s altar. Shortly thereafter, the account reveals
9, 10. (a) What moral issue did The Watchtower address in 1935?
(b) What is the Bible’s balanced teaching on the use of alcohol?
196

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

what likely led those men to doing something so inappropriate, for God gave a law forbidding all the
priests to use alcohol while engaged in their sacred
duties. (Lev. 10:1, 2, 8-11) Applying that underlying
principle today, Christ’s followers are careful to
avoid being under the in?uence of alcohol while taking part in their sacred service.
In more recent decades, Christ’s followers have
been further blessed with increased understanding about alcoholism, a condition involving persistent, addictive misuse of alcohol. Thanks to timely
spiritual food, many have been helped to handle
that condition appropriately and regain control of
their lives. Many more have been helped to avoid
the problem altogether. None need to allow alcohol
abuse to rob them of their dignity, their family and,
above all, their privilege of engaging in pure worship
of Jehovah.
11

Use of tobacco. Christ’s servants began taking a
dim view of the use of tobacco even before the last
12

11. Why has it been a blessing for God’s people to receive increased
understanding about alcoholism?
12. How did Christ’s servants view the use of tobacco even before the
last days began?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

197

days began. A number of years ago, an elderly brother, Charles Capen, recalled his ?rst meeting with
Charles Taze Russell late in the 19th century. Capen,
then 13 years old, and three of his brothers were on
the staircase of the Bible House in Allegheny, Pennsylvania. As Russell passed them, he inquired: “Are
you boys smoking? I smell tobacco smoke.” They assured him that they were not smoking. Surely they
were left with no doubts about his views on the subject. In the Watch Tower of August 1, 1895, Brother Russell commented on 2 Corinthians 7:1, saying:
“I cannot see how it would be to God’s glory, or to
his own pro?t, for any Christian to use tobacco in
any form. . . . We cannot imagine our Lord reeking
with the fumes of tobacco or putting into his mouth
anything de?ling.”
In 1935, The Watchtower called tobacco “the
?lthy weed” and noted that no one who chose to
chew it or smoke it could remain a member of the
Bethel family or serve as a representative of God’s
organization in the pioneer work or the traveling
ministry. In 1973 a further moral re?nement came.
13

13. What moral re?nement came in 1973?
198

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

The Watchtower of June 1 explained that no Witness
of Jehovah could remain in good standing in the congregation while carrying on this death-dealing, de?ling, and unloving practice. Those who refused to
give up the misuse of tobacco were to be disfellowshipped.1[3] Christ had taken another important step
in re?ning his followers.
14

Misuse of blood. In Noah’s day, God stated that

it would be wrong to eat blood. He rea?rmed that
position in the Law to the nation of Israel, and he
similarly directed the Christian congregation to “abstain . . . from blood.” (Acts 15:20, 29; Gen. 9:4;
Lev. 7:26) Not surprisingly, Satan found a way in
modern times to cause many to disregard this divine
standard. Doctors were experimenting with blood
transfusion in the 19th century, but after blood
types were discovered, the practice became more
widespread. In 1937, blood began to be collected and
stored in blood banks, and then World War II gave
1[3] The misuse of tobacco includes smoking it, chewing it, or cultivating it for such uses.

14. What is God’s standard regarding blood, and how did the practice
of blood transfusion become commonplace?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

199

the practice a big push. Soon, transfusions became
commonplace around the world.
As early as 1944, The Watchtower indicated that
receiving a blood transfusion was really another way
of eating blood. The following year, that Scriptural
position was strengthened and clari?ed. By 1951,
a list of questions and answers was published to
help God’s people deal with medical professionals.
Around the world, Christ’s faithful followers were
taking a courageous stand, often in the face of scorn,
hostility, and even outright persecution. But Christ
kept moving his organization to provide the needed
support. Detailed and well-researched brochures and
articles were published.
15

In 1979, some elders began to visit hospitals in
order to help doctors to understand better our position, the Scriptural reasons for it, and the availability of alternatives to blood. In 1980, elders
in 39 cities in the United States received specialized training in this work. In time, the Governing
16

15, 16. (a) Jehovah’s Witnesses took what stand regarding blood
transfusion? (b) What support has been provided to Christ’s followers
regarding transfusions and nonblood management, and with what result?
200

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Body gave approval for the establishment of Hospital Liaison Committees all over the world. Have
these e?orts made any headway over the years? Today, many tens of thousands of medical professionals—including doctors, surgeons, and anesthesiologists—are cooperating with Witness patients,
showing respect for our choice of nonblood management. More and more hospitals o?er nonblood management, and some even regard it as the highest standard of medical care. Is it not thrilling to think of
the ways Jesus has protected his followers from
Satan’s e?orts to pollute them?—Read Ephesians 5:
25-27.
17

We do well to ask ourselves, ‘Do we value the

way Christ has been re?ning his followers, training
us to adhere to Jehovah’s lofty moral standards?’ If
so, then let us keep in mind that Satan is ever seeking to alienate us from Jehovah and Jesus by eroding our respect for godly morals. To counter that in?uence, Jehovah’s organization consistently provides
loving warnings and reminders about the immoral
17. How may we show that we value the way that Christ has been re?ning his followers?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

201

ways of this world. Let us remain alert, responsive,
and obedient to such helpful counsel.—Prov. 19:20.
Protecting the Congregation From Moral Reproach
18 A second area of moral re?nement involves the
measures taken to keep the congregation clean. Sadly, not all who accept Jehovah’s standards of conduct
and dedicate themselves to God loyally stick with
their decision. Some eventually have a change of
heart and willfully rebel against those standards.
What is to be done about such ones? We may ?nd
one indication in Ezekiel’s vision of the spiritual
temple discussed at the outset of this chapter. Remember those lofty gates. Within each entryway,
there were guard chambers. Guards would protect
the temple, evidently to prevent those who were “uncircumcised in heart” from entering. (Ezek. 44:9)
That is a clear reminder that pure worship is a privilege accorded only to those who endeavor to live by
Jehovah’s pure standards of conduct. In a similar
way, the privilege of associating with fellow Christians in worship is not open to everyone today.
18. When it comes to those who willfully rebel against God’s standards, Ezekiel’s vision gives us what clear reminder?
202

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Back in 1892, the Watch Tower commented that
it is “our duty to disfellowship (as Christians) those
who, either directly or indirectly, deny that Christ
gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price] for
all.” (Read 2 John 10.) In 1904, the book The New Creation acknowledged that those who persist in wrong
conduct pose a real danger of demoralizing the congregation. Back then, the entire congregation would
participate in “church trials” to examine cases of serious wrongdoing. However, such occasions were
rare. In 1944, The Watchtower showed that only responsible brothers should handle such matters. In
1952 a Bible-based procedure for handling judicial
matters was published in The Watchtower, highlighting a key reason for disfellowshipping unrepentant
ones—to keep the congregation clean.
19

In the decades since then, Christ has helped his
followers to clarify and re?ne the handling of serious cases of wrongdoing. Christian elders are carefully trained to care for judicial matters in Jehovah’s
way, with a proper balance of justice and mercy.
20

19, 20. (a) How has Christ gradually helped his followers to re?ne
the way serious wrongdoing is handled? (b) What are three reasons for
disfellowshipping unrepentant wrongdoers?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

203

Today we see clearly at least three reasons for taking the action of disfellowshipping an unrepentant
wrongdoer from the congregation: (1) to keep Jehovah’s name free from reproach, (2) to protect the
congregation from the contaminating e?ects of serious sin, and (3) to move a wrongdoer to repentance
if that is possible.
21

Do you see how the arrangement of disfellow-

shipping has proved to be a blessing to Christ’s followers today? In ancient Israel, wrongdoers often became a corrupting in?uence on the nation, at times
even outnumbering those who loved Jehovah and
sought to do what was right. Thus, the nation often
brought reproach upon Jehovah’s name and lost divine favor. (Jer. 7:23-28) But today, Jehovah is dealing with a community of spiritual men and women.
Because hardened wrongdoers are removed from our
midst, they are not allowed to become, in e?ect,
weapons in Satan’s hand to in?ict further damage on
the congregation and its clean standing. Rather, their
in?uence is kept to a minimum. As a group, we are
21. In what way has the arrangement of disfellowshipping proved to be
a blessing to God’s people?
204

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

thus assured of keeping Jehovah’s favor. Remember,
Jehovah promised: “No weapon formed against you
will have any success.” (Isa. 54:17) Do we loyally
support the elders, who bear the heavy load of handling judicial cases?

22

Glorifying the One
to Whom Every Family Owes Its Name
A third area in which Christ’s followers have

bene?ted from continual re?nement has to do with
marriage and family life. Has our view of the family
been re?ned over the years? Yes. For example, when
we read of God’s servants in the early part of the
20th century, we cannot help but be impressed and
even amazed at their spirit of self-sacri?ce. We are
profoundly grateful for the way they put their sacred
service above all else in life. At the same time,
though, we can readily see that more balance was
needed. How so?
23

It was not uncommon for brothers to undertake

assignments in the ministry or the traveling work
22, 23. Why are we grateful to our fellow Christians of the early
20th century, yet what evidence is there that more balance was needed
in regard to the family?
MORAL REFINEMENTS

205

that took them far from home for many months at
a time. Marriage was, at times, discouraged with
more force than the Scriptures warrant, while relatively little was said about how to build strong
Christian marriages. Do the same conditions prevail
among Christ’s followers today? Hardly!
24

Today, theocratic assignments are not to be pur-

sued at the expense of family obligations. (Read
1 Timothy 5:8.) Further, Christ has ensured that his
faithful followers on earth receive a steady stream of
helpful, balanced Scriptural counsel regarding marriage and family life. (Eph. 3:14, 15) In 1978, the
book Making Your Family Life Happy appeared. Some
18 years later came the book The Secret of Family
Happiness. Moreover, The Watchtower has featured
numerous articles designed to help married couples
apply Scriptural principles in their relationship.
25

And what about young ones? Through the years,

their needs have received more and more atten24. How did Christ help his faithful people to gain a more balanced
view of marriage and the family?
25-27. How have the needs of children of varying ages received ever
greater attention through the years?
206

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

tion. Jehovah’s organization has long provided good
things for children of varying ages, but what was
once a trickle has become a full, steady stream.
For example, the “Juvenile Bible Study ” feature appeared in The Golden Age from 1919 to 1921. After
that came The Golden Age ABC brochure in 1920 and
the book Children in 1941. In the 1970’s, the books
Listening to the Great Teacher, Your Youth—Getting the
Best out of It, and My Book of Bible Stories were provided. In 1982, the Awake! series “Young People Ask”
began, leading to the book Questions Young People Ask
—Answers That Work, published in 1989.
Today, we have two up-to-date volumes of Young
People Ask, while the series continues on our Web
site, jw.org. We also have the book Learn From the
Great Teacher. Our Web site has plenty of features
for the young, including Bible-character cards, Bible
study activities for older and younger children, puzzles, videos, and illustrated Bible stories, as well as
Bible lessons for children aged three and under.
Clearly, Christ’s view of young ones has not changed
since he gathered the young children into his arms
back in the ?rst century. (Mark 10:13-16) He wants
26

MORAL REFINEMENTS

207

the young ones among us to feel beloved and wellfed spiritually.
Jesus also wants children to be protected from
harm. As this morally degraded world has sunk deeper into depravity, the plague of child abuse has become more prevalent. Therefore, clear and direct material has been published to help parents keep their
children safe from this vicious practice.1[4]
27

Is it not thrilling to contemplate how Christ has
continued to re?ne his followers, training them to respect, live by, and bene?t from Jehovah’s lofty moral standards? Think again about the temple that Ezekiel saw in vision. Remember the lofty entrances.
True, that temple is, not a physical place, but a spiritual one. Nevertheless, do we see it as real? We enter into it, not just by going to a Kingdom Hall or
by opening a Bible or by ringing a doorbell in the
ministry. Those are physical acts involving tangible
things. A hypocrite could do those things without
28

1[4] For example, see chapter 32 of Learn From the Great Teacher;
also see pages 3-11 of the October 2007 issue of Awake!

28. (a) What is required if we are to engage in pure worship, as illustrated by Ezekiel’s temple vision? (b) What are you determined
to do?
208

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ever entering Jehovah’s temple. However, if we do
such things while at the same time living by Jehovah’s exalted moral standards and taking part in
pure worship with the right heart attitude, we have
entered into and are serving in that most sacred of
places—the arrangement for the pure worship of Jehovah God! Let us always cherish that precious privilege. Let us also keep doing our utmost to re?ect
Jehovah’s holiness by upholding his righteous standards!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? In what ways has Christ re?ned his followers
as regards morals?
? How have Kingdom subjects been protected
from the in?uence of willful wrongdoers?
? How has God’s organization given ever
greater attention to marriage and the family?
? Why should we be determined to adhere to
the lofty moral standards required of pure
worshippers?

MORAL REFINEMENTS

209

12

Organized to Serve
“the God of Peace”

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Jehovah progressively organizes his people

WHEN zealous Bible Student John A. Bohnet received his copy of Zion’s Watch Tower of January 1895, he was thrilled by what he saw. The magazine had a bold new cover—an illustration of a
lighthouse towering over a stormy sea, sweeping its
beams of light across a dark sky. The announcement
in the magazine about the new design was entitled
“Our New Dress.”
2

Impressed, Brother Bohnet sent a letter to Broth-

er Russell. “Glad to see the TOWER out on Dress
Parade,” he wrote. “It looks nice.” Another faithful
Bible Student, John H. Brown, wrote about the cover: “It is very striking. How ?rm a foundation the
tower stands upon, while those waves and storms
beat upon it.” That new cover was the ?rst change
1, 2. What change did Zion’s Watch Tower undergo in January 1895,
and how did the brothers react?
210

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

our brothers saw that year—but it was not the last.
In November they learned of yet another major
change. Signi?cantly, again it involved a stormy sea.
3

An extensive article published in the Watch Tow-

er of November 15, 1895, laid bare a problem: Stormy
waves of trouble were disrupting the peace in the association, or organization, of Bible Students. Brothers increasingly argued about who should be the
leader in the local congregation. To help the brothers see what was needed to correct that divisive spirit of rivalry, the article compared the organization
to a ship. Then it candidly admitted that those taking the lead had failed to prepare the shiplike organization for stormy weather. What had to be done?
4

The article noted that a capable captain makes

sure that life preservers are aboard and that the crew
is ready to batten down the hatches when a storm is
coming. Similarly, those leading the organization
needed to make sure that all congregations were prepared to handle stormy conditions. To accomplish
that, the article announced a far-reaching change. It
3, 4. What problem was addressed in the Watch Tower of November 15, 1895, and what far-reaching change was announced?
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

211

directed that starting immediately, “in every company, elders be chosen” to “ ‘take the oversight’ of the
?ock.”—Acts 20:28.
That ?rst elder arrangement signi?ed a timely
step forward in establishing a stable congregation
structure. It helped our brothers to navigate through
the raging waves stirred up by World War I. In the
decades that followed, further organizational improvements helped God’s people to become better equipped to serve Jehovah. What Bible prophecy foretold this development? What organizational
changes have you witnessed? How have you bene?ted from them?
5

“I Will Appoint Peace as Your Overseers”
6 As we considered in Chapter 9, Isaiah foretold
that Jehovah would bless his people with an increase
in numbers. (Isa. 60:22) However, Jehovah promised
to do even more. In the same prophecy, he stated:
“Instead of the copper I will bring in gold, and instead of the iron I will bring in silver, instead of the
5. (a) Why was the ?rst elder arrangement a timely step forward?
(b) What questions will we consider?
6, 7. (a) What is the meaning of Isaiah 60:17? (b) What does the
mention of “overseers” and “task assigners” indicate?
212

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

wood, copper, and instead of the stones, iron; and I
will appoint peace as your overseers and righteousness as your task assigners.” (Isa. 60:17) What does
that prophecy mean? How does it apply to us today?
Isaiah’s prophecy states that one material would
be replaced by another. But note that the replacements are changes, not from bad to good, but from
good to better. Replacing copper with gold is an improvement, and the same is true of the other materials here mentioned. Thus, with this word picture, Jehovah foretold that the condition of his people
would improve step-by-step. To what sort of improvement does the prophecy refer? By mentioning
“overseers” and “task assigners,” Jehovah indicated
that gradual improvements would come in the way
his people were cared for and organized.
7

Who causes this organizational progress? Jehovah states: “I will bring in gold, . . . I will bring in
silver, . . . and I will appoint peace.” Indeed, improvements in congregation organization have been
brought about, not by human e?orts, but by Jehovah
8

8. (a) The improvements mentioned in Isaiah’s prophecy are caused
by whom? (b) How do we bene?t from the improvements? (See also the
box “He Humbly Accepted Correction.”)
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

213

HE HUMBLY ACCEPTED CORRECTION
THE Finnish edition of The Watch Tower of April 1,
1916, contained a letter from Brother Russell directed
to a few brothers in Scandinavia, including Brother
Kaarlo Harteva. Brother Russell wrote to them: “We
encourage all of you, dear brothers in the faith, to return to the truth and the work that belongs to this
era.” Why did Brother Russell make this appeal?
Brother Harteva, who was born in 1882, was one of
the ?rst Bible Students in Finland. He was baptized in
April 1910, and in the summer of 1912, Brother Russell authorized him to publish The Watch Tower in
Finnish. All went well until World War I broke out.
Brother Harteva wrote in the December 1, 1914, issue
of The Watch Tower: “Because of the di?cult economic situation, . . . we cannot promise that The Watch
Tower will have the same number of pages or will be
published as often this year.” However, in 1915, to
raise funds, Brother Harteva and others founded a cooperative association called Ararat, which began to
publish a magazine by that name.
As Brother Harteva focused his attention on the
new association and the new magazine, another
brother began to serve as editor of the Finnish Watch
214

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Tower. Ararat magazine published Biblical articles but
also articles on such topics as natural cures and the
newly invented language Esperanto. Before long, the
new magazine distracted the brothers from the clear
teachings of truth. At that point, Brother Russell, out
of concern for their spiritual welfare, appealed to
Brother Harteva and others to “return to the truth.”
How did Brother Harteva react? He published
Brother Russell’s letter in Ararat magazine, together
with his own reply. Brother Harteva apologized for
his actions and stated: “If I may correct the matter, I
want to do what I can.” Shortly thereafter, in the last
issue of Ararat magazine, Brother Harteva again apologized for the confusion he had caused and added: “I
will try to be more careful with regard to every aspect
of the present truth.” Unlike some of the proud elected elders of those days, Kaarlo Harteva humbly accepted correction.
Later, Brother Harteva was again appointed as the
editor of The Watch Tower in Finnish and as branch
overseer. He continued to take care of those responsibilities until 1950. He ?nished his earthly course in
1957, faithful to Jehovah and to the truth. Indeed,
those who humbly accept correction from their King,
Jesus, are re?ned and receive Jehovah’s blessing.
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

215

himself. And ever since Jesus was installed as King,
Jehovah has brought about these improvements by
means of his Son. How do we bene?t from these
changes? The same scripture states that these improvements will result in “peace” and “righteousness.” As we accept God’s guidance and make adjustments, peace prevails among us and love of
righteousness moves us to serve Jehovah, whom the
apostle Paul described as “the God of peace.”—Phil.
4:9.
9

Regarding Jehovah, Paul also wrote: “God is a

God not of disorder but of peace.” (1 Cor. 14:33) Note
that Paul did not contrast disorder with order, but
he contrasted it with peace. Why? Consider this: Order in itself does not invariably result in peaceful
conditions. For example, a group of soldiers may
march in an orderly way toward the front lines,
but their orderly advance results in war, not peace.
Hence, as Christians, we want to keep a key fact in
mind: Any structure of order that does not have
peace as its foundation will sooner or later collapse.
9. What is the proper foundation for order and unity in the congregation, and why?
216

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

In contrast, godly peace promotes the kind of order
that lasts. Therefore, how grateful we are that our
organization is guided and re?ned by “the God who
gives peace”! (Rom. 15:33) God-given peace forms
the foundation for the bene?cial order and the heartfelt unity that we enjoy and appreciate so much in
our congregations worldwide.—Ps. 29:11.
10 The box “How the Manner of Oversight Improved” gives an overview of the bene?cial and orderly changes that occurred in our organization during the early years. But what changes ‘from copper
to gold’ has Jehovah brought about more recently
through our King? How have those adjustments in
oversight forti?ed the peace and unity of the congregations worldwide? How are they helping you personally to serve “the God of peace”?
How Christ Leads the Congregation
11 From 1964 to 1971, the governing body supervised an extensive Bible study project that examined,
10. (a) What improvements occurred in our organization during the
early years? (See the box “How the Manner of Oversight Improved.”)
(b) What questions will now be considered?
11. (a) A study of the Scriptures led to what adjustment in understanding? (b) What were the brothers of the governing body determined
to do?
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

217

HOW THE MANNER
OF OVERSIGHT IMPROVED
“We voted for the elders by raising the right hand. Then, a
brother walked up the aisle counting the votes.”—Sister Rose
Swingle, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.

1881—To establish contacts among Bible Students living
in the same area, Brother Russell asks those who regularly hold meetings to inform the Watch Tower o?ce where
they meet.
1895—All congregations are instructed to choose from
among themselves brothers who can serve as elders.
1919—In each congregation a service director is appointed theocratically by the branch o?ce. His responsibilities
include organizing the preaching work and encouraging
participation in the ?eld ministry. Some of the congregation elders do not support the arrangement of having a
service director.
1932—The annual election of elders by the congregation is
eliminated. Instead, the congregation elects a service committee made up of brothers who zealously share in the
preaching work and who live up to the newly adopted
name Jehovah’s Witnesses. One of their number, nominated by the congregation, is appointed by the Society or
branch o?ce to be the service director.
218

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

1937—Brothers who are part of the great crowd can serve
on service committees alongside their anointed brothers.
1938—Congregations adopt a resolution requesting that
all congregation servants be appointed theocratically.
This marks the end of democratic elections in the congregations.
To learn more about historical developments in organizational structure, see Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers of
God’s Kingdom, pages 204-235.

among many other subjects, how the ?rst-century
Christian congregation functioned.1[1] As to organization structure, it was learned that the oversight of
congregations in the ?rst century was carried out by
a body of elders instead of just by one elder, or overseer. (Read Philippians 1:1; 1 Timothy 4:14.) When
that point was better understood, the governing
body realized that their King, Jesus, was guiding
them in making improvements in the organizational
structure of God’s people—and the brothers of the
governing body were determined to yield to the
King’s direction. They promptly made adjustments
1[1] The results of that extensive research were published in the
reference work Aid to Bible Understanding.
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

219

to bring the organization into fuller harmony with
the elder arrangement set out in the Scriptures.
What are some adjustments that were made in the
early 1970’s?
12

The ?rst adjustment applied to the governing

body itself. Until that time, that group of anointed
brothers was made up of the seven members of the
board of directors of the Watch Tower Bible and
Tract Society of Pennsylvania. However, in 1971, the
governing body was enlarged from 7 to 11 members
and was no longer identi?ed with the board of directors. The members considered themselves equals and
started an annual rotation of the chairmanship in alphabetical order.
13

The next adjustment a?ected each congregation.

In what way? From 1932 to 1972, congregation oversight had been carried out mainly by one brother.
Until 1936, such an appointed brother was called the
service director. Thereafter, the name was changed
12. (a) What adjustment was made within the governing body? (b) Describe how the Governing B ody is now organized. (See the box “How
the Governing B ody Cares for Kingdom Interests,” pages 233-235.)
13. (a) What arrangement had been in e?ect for 40 years? (b) What
did the Governing B ody do in 1972?
220

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

to company servant, then to congregation servant,
and ?nally to congregation overseer. Those appointed brothers cared zealously for the spiritual welfare
of the ?ock. The congregation overseer usually made
decisions for the congregation without consulting
other servants in the congregation. However, during
the year 1972, the Governing Body prepared the way
for a historic change. What did that change involve?
14

Instead of having one brother serve as the con-

gregation overseer in each congregation, other brothers who were Scripturally quali?ed would now also
be theocratically appointed to serve as Christian elders. Together they would form a body of elders that
would oversee the local congregation. That new elder arrangement went into e?ect on October 1, 1972.
Today the coordinator of a body of elders views himself, not as a ?rst among equals, but “as a lesser one.” (Luke 9:48) What a blessing such humble
brothers are for the worldwide brotherhood!—Phil.
2:3.
14. (a) What new arrangement went into e?ect on October 1, 1972?
(b) How does the coordinator of a body of elders apply the counsel
found at Philippians 2:3?
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

221

15

The arrangement of sharing congregation re-

sponsibility among members of bodies of elders has
proved to be a great improvement. Consider these
three bene?ts: First and foremost, the arrangement
helps all elders—no matter how weighty their congregation responsibilities—to be very conscious that
Jesus is the Head of the congregation. (Eph. 5:23)
Second, as Proverbs 11:14 states: “There is success
through many advisers.” As elders consult together
on matters that a?ect the spiritual well-being of the
congregation and consider one another’s suggestions,
they are helped to reach decisions that harmonize
with Bible principles. (Prov. 27:17) Jehovah blesses
such decisions, and these lead to success. Third, by
having more quali?ed brothers serve as elders, the
organization has been able to keep up with the growing need for oversight and shepherding care within
the congregations. (Isa. 60:3-5) Just think of it—the
number of congregations worldwide increased from
over 27,000 in 1971 to more than 113,000 in 2013!
15. (a) The arrangement for congregations to have a body of elders
has yielded what bene?ts? (b) What shows that our King acted with
foresight?
222

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“WE WERE AMAZED”
A MISSIONARY couple in Asia were assigned to a congregation that had not seen growth in many years. They
noticed that the local brothers were loving but did not follow organizational instructions. After the missionaries
had developed friendships with the publishers, the missionary brother set out step-by-step to bring the congregation structure in line with the way Jehovah’s people are
organized worldwide. What was the result? Within two
years, meeting attendance doubled, new ones began to
share in the preaching work, and more than 20 got baptized. “We were amazed,” recount the couple. “Jehovah
blessed us superabundantly! Seeing the results of applying
the instructions of God’s organization has given joy to all
in the congregation.”

Clearly, with foresight, our King has provided the
needed shepherds for his followers at the right time.
—Mic. 5:5.
16

“B ecoming Examples to the Flock”
Back in the early days of the Bible Students, the

elders already understood that they had a responsibility to help fellow believers to remain servants of
16. (a) What responsibility do elders have? (b) How did the Bible Students view Jesus’ admonition to ‘shepherd the sheep’?
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

223

God. (Read Galatians 6:10.) In 1908, an article in the
Watch Tower considered Jesus’ admonition: “Shepherd my little sheep.” (John 21:15-17) The article
told elders: “It is very important that the Master’s
commission in respect to the ?ock shall have a prominent place in our hearts, that we shall rightly esteem it a great privilege to feed and to tend the
Lord’s followers.” In 1925, The Watch Tower again emphasized the importance of serving as shepherds by
reminding elders: “The church of God is his own,
. . . and he will hold all responsible for their privilege of serving their brethren.”
How has Jehovah’s organization helped elders
to turn their shepherding skills from ‘iron into silver’? By providing training. In 1959, the ?rst Kingdom Ministry School for overseers was held. One
class session considered the subject “Giving Personal
Attention.” Those responsible brothers were encouraged to “work out a schedule for visiting publishers in their homes.” The session presented various
ways in which shepherds could make such visits upbuilding. In 1966, an updated Kingdom Ministry
17

17. How have overseers been helped to become capable shepherds?
224

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

School began. It considered the subject “Importance of the Shepherding Work.” What was the main
point of that class session? Those taking the lead
“should share in providing loving care for the ?ock
of God, while not failing to give due attention to
their own households and to the ?eld ministry.” In
recent years, more schools for elders have been held.
What has been the result of the continuing training
that Jehovah’s organization has provided? Today, the
Christian congregation has thousands of quali?ed
brothers who serve as spiritual shepherds.
18

Christian elders have been put in place by Jeho-

vah through our King, Jesus, to carry out a weighty
task. What is it? To lead God’s sheep through the
most critical time in human history. (Eph. 4:11, 12;
2 Tim. 3:1) Jehovah and Jesus have deep a?ection for
hardworking elders because these brothers obey the
Scriptural admonition: “Shepherd the ?ock of God
under your care . . . willingly . . . , eagerly . . . , becoming examples to the ?ock.” (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Let us
consider two of the many ways in which Christian
18. (a) With what weighty responsibility have elders been entrusted?
(b) Why do Jehovah and Jesus have a?ection for hardworking elders?
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

225

shepherds are examples to the ?ock and greatly contribute to peace and joy in the congregation.
19

How Elders Today Shepherd the Flock of God
First, elders work with members of the congre-

gation. The Gospel writer Luke stated about Jesus:
“He traveled from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the
Kingdom of God. And the Twelve were with him.”
(Luke 8:1) Just as Jesus preached alongside his apostles, so exemplary elders today work side by side
with their fellow believers in the preaching work.
They realize that by doing so, they contribute much
to the wholesome spirit of the congregation. How do
congregation members feel about such elders? Jeannine, a sister in her late 80’s, notes: “Working together with an elder in ?eld service gives me a ?ne opportunity to converse with him and to get to know
him better.” Steven, a brother in his mid-30’s, says:
“When an elder works with me in the door-to-door
ministry, I feel he wants to help me. Receiving such
help gives me much joy.”
19. How do we feel about elders who accompany us in the ministry?
226

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

20

Second, Jehovah’s organization has trained el-

ders to show concern for those who have lost contact with the congregation. (Heb. 12:12) Why should
elders help such spiritually weak ones, and how
should they go about it? Jesus’ parable about a shepherd and a lost sheep provides the answers. (Read
Luke 15:4-7.) When the shepherd in the parable notices that a sheep is missing, he searches for the lost
sheep as if it were the only one he possesses. How
do Christian elders today imitate the example set by
that shepherd? Just as the lost sheep remains precious in the eyes of the shepherd, so those who have
lost contact with God’s people remain precious in
the eyes of the elders. They view a spiritually weak
individual as a lost sheep—not a lost cause. Moreover, just as the shepherd decides to “go after the
lost one until he ?nds it,” so elders take the initiative to ?nd and help those who are weak.
21

What does the shepherd in the parable do when

he ?nds the sheep? He gently lifts it up, “puts it on
his shoulders,” and carries it back to the ?ock.
20, 21. How can elders imitate the shepherd in Jesus’ parable? Give
an example. (See also the box “Fruitful Weekly Visits.”)
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

227

FRUITFUL WEEKLY VISITS
MOVED by the desire to help the lost sheep, the elders in
a congregation in the United States considered what they
could do to help those who had lost contact with the
?ock. They determined that about 30 individuals who had
stopped serving Jehovah decades earlier were still living
in the congregation’s territory. Most of them were now up
in age.
Alfredo, one of the elders, got a list of their names and
began visiting them. “Every Friday morning, I knock on
the door of an inactive one,” he relates. When the inactive
one opens the door, Alfredo tries to have a relaxed conversation in which he conveys his heartfelt feelings of concern. He tells the inactive brother or sister that the congregation has not forgotten the ?ne work the person did
in behalf of Jehovah’s Kingdom. Says Alfredo, “When I
told one elderly inactive brother how many hours he had
preached and how many magazines he had placed during
the last month that he reported ?eld service in 1976, the
brother’s eyes welled up with tears.” Alfredo also reads
Luke 15:4-7, 10 with those whom he visits, and then he
asks them, “What happens when a lost sheep returns to
the congregation? Jehovah, Jesus, and the angels rejoice
—just think of it!”
For the past two years, Alfredo has been reaching out to
inactive ones. What has been the result of his patient ef228

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

forts? He has had the joy of helping two brothers start associating with the congregation again. They now regularly attend the Sunday meeting. “When they entered the
Kingdom Hall, it was my turn to shed some tears,” he says
with a smile. “Although these inactive ones have started
attending meetings,” he adds, “I still contact them on Fridays because they tell me that those weekly visits are moments they look forward to—and I feel the same way!”

Similarly, an elder’s heartfelt expressions of concern
may gently lift up a spiritually weak one and help
him to return to the congregation. That is what happened to Victor, a brother in Africa who stopped associating with the congregation. He relates: “During
the eight years that I was inactive, the elders kept
reaching out to me.” What especially touched him?
He explains: “One day, John, an elder with whom I
had attended the Pioneer Service School, took time
to visit me and showed me some pictures he had taken of us during the school. They brought back so
many wonderful memories that I began to long for
the joy I felt when I served Jehovah.” Shortly after John’s visit, Victor returned to the congregation. Today he again serves as a pioneer. Indeed,
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

229

caring Christian elders contribute greatly to our joy.
—2 Cor. 1:24.1[2]
Improved Oversight
Strengthens Unity Among God’s People
22 As noted earlier, Jehovah foretold that righteousness and peace would steadily increase among
God’s people. (Isa. 60:17) Both of these qualities fortify the unity of the congregations. In what ways? As
to righteousness, “God is one Jehovah.” (Deut. 6:4)
His righteous standards do not di?er from congregations in one country to congregations in another
country. No, his standards of right and wrong are
one, and they are the same for “all the congregations
of the holy ones.” (1 Cor. 14:33) Hence, a congregation will ?ourish only when God’s standards are applied. As to peace, our King wants us not only to
enjoy peace in the congregation but also to be
“peacemakers.” (Matt. 5:9) Therefore, we “pursue
the things making for peace.” We take the initiative in resolving di?erences that may at times arise
1[2] See the article “Christian Elders—‘Fellow Workers for Our
Joy,’ ” in the January 15, 2013, issue of The Watchtower, pages 27-31.

22. How do righteousness and peace fortify the unity of the Christian
congregation? (See also the box “We Were Amazed.”)
230

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

among us. (Rom. 14:19) In that way, we contribute
to both the peace and the unity of our congregation.
—Isa. 60:18.
Back in November 1895, when the Watch Tower
announced the ?rst elder arrangement, the responsible brothers also expressed their heartfelt desire.
What was it? They wished and prayed that this new
organizational arrangement would help God’s people
to “come speedily to the unity of the faith.” Looking
back over the decades, we are grateful to note that
the gradual re?nements in oversight brought about
by Jehovah through our King have indeed forti?ed
our unity of worship. (Ps. 99:4) As a result, today all
of Jehovah’s people worldwide rejoice as we walk “in
the same spirit,” follow “the same footsteps,” and
serve the “God of peace” “shoulder to shoulder.”
—2 Cor. 12:18; read Zephaniah 3:9.
23

23. As Jehovah’s servants, what do we enjoy today?

ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

231

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What organizational improvements has the
Kingdom brought about?
? How have adjustments in congregation
oversight helped you to serve “the God of
peace”?
? What words and deeds of an elder have added
to your joy?
? How can you personally contribute to both
the peace and the unity of the congregation?

232

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

HOW THE G OVERNING B ODY CARES
FOR KINGD OM INTERESTS
THE Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses is made up
of brothers who are anointed servants of Jehovah God. As
a group, they form “the faithful and discreet slave.” They
have the responsibility of providing spiritual food and giving direction and impetus to the Kingdom-preaching work
throughout the earth.—Matt. 24:14, 45-47.
Governing Body meetings are held each week, usually on
Wednesday. This enables these brothers to work together
in unity. (Ps. 133:1) The members of the Governing Body
also serve on various committees. In caring for Kingdom
interests, each committee has its area of oversight. Here is
a summary of their responsibilities.

Coordinators’ Committee
The brothers serving on this committee oversee legal matters as well as the use of the media when it is necessary to
convey an accurate picture of our beliefs. They also respond to disasters, outbreaks of persecution, and other
emergencies a?ecting our brotherhood anywhere in the
world.

Personnel Committee
This committee is entrusted with the oversight of arrangements for the physical and spiritual welfare and assistance
ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

233

of members of Bethel families earth wide. It oversees the
selecting and inviting of new members of Bethel families
and handles questions regarding their Bethel service.

Publishing Committee
Those serving on this committee supervise the printing
and shipping of Bible literature worldwide. They oversee
printeries and properties owned and operated by the various corporations used by Jehovah’s Witnesses, as well as
all construction worldwide, including the work of building
Kingdom Halls. They arrange for the best use of funds donated for the Kingdom work.

S ervice Committee
The brothers who make up this committee oversee all
areas of the evangelizing work and matters a?ecting congregations, publishers, pioneers, elders, traveling overseers, and missionaries. They supervise, among numerous
other things, the activities of Hospital Liaison Committees.

Teaching Committee
This committee oversees the instruction provided at assemblies, conventions, and congregation meetings. It also
has oversight of Gilead School, the School for Kingdom
Evangelizers, and the Pioneer Service School, as well as
other schools. In addition, this committee oversees the
234

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

preparation of Our Christian Life and Ministry—Meeting
Workbook and the development of audio and video programs.

Writing Committee
The brothers serving on this committee supervise the
preparation of spiritual food in written and electronic
form for fellow believers and the general public. It also
cares for the organization’s Web site and oversees the
translation work done throughout the earth. Additionally,
this committee responds to questions about the meaning
of certain scriptures and points presented in the publications.

ORGANIZED TO SERVE “THE GOD OF PEACE”

235

SECTION 4

K INGD OM C ONQUESTS
Legally Establishing the Good News
WHILE preaching from house to house, you hear a siren in
the distance. It steadily gets louder. As you start speaking to
the next householder, your witnessing partner is distracted
when a police car pulls up. An o?cer gets out and approaches, asking: “Are the two of you the people who have been
going door to door talking about the Bible? We’ve been getting complaints!” You answer respectfully, identifying yourselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses. What will happen next?
To a great extent, this depends on history. Over the years,
how has the government of the land where you live dealt
with Jehovah’s Witnesses? Is there a measure of religious
freedom? If so, that likely has a lot to do with the way your
spiritual brothers and sisters over the decades have worked
hard in “the defending and legally establishing of the good
news.” (Phil. 1:7) Wherever you live, pondering the record
of the legal victories of Jehovah’s Witnesses can be very
faith-strengthening. In this section, we will examine some of
that remarkable record. Our victories provide thrilling proof
that the Kingdom is a reality, for we could never have
achieved so much on our own!

13

Kingdom Preachers Take Their
Case to Court

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

As Jesus foretold, his people face legal opposition to their
preaching work

IT IS shortly after Pentecost 33 C.E. The Christian congregation in Jerusalem is only a few weeks
old. Clearly, Satan sees this as the right time for
action. Before the congregation grows strong, he
wants to stamp it out. Quickly, Satan maneuvers
events in such a way that the religious leaders ban
the Kingdom-preaching work. The apostles, however,
courageously preach on, and many men and women
become “believers in the Lord.”—Acts 4:18, 33; 5:14.
Enraged, the opposers strike again—this time by
jailing all the apostles. However, during the night,
Jehovah’s angel opens the prison doors, and by daybreak the apostles are back out preaching! Again
they are arrested and taken before the rulers, who
2

1, 2. (a) The religious leaders succeeded in doing what to the preaching work, but how did the apostles react? (b) Why did the apostles
refuse to obey the ban on preaching?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

237

accuse the apostles of breaking the decree against
preaching. In response, the apostles boldly declare:
“We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” The
rulers are so infuriated that they want to “do away”
with the apostles. But at that critical moment, the
esteemed Law teacher Gamaliel speaks up, warning
the rulers: “Be careful . . . Do not meddle with these
men, but let them alone.” Surprisingly, the rulers
take his advice and let the apostles go. What do
those faithful men do? Undaunted, they continue
“without letup teaching and declaring the good news
about the Christ, Jesus.”—Acts 5:17-21, 27-42; Prov.
21:1, 30.
3

That court case back in 33 C.E. was the ?rst oc-

currence of o?cial opposition to the Christian congregation, but by far not the last. (Acts 4:5-8; 16:20;
17:6, 7) In our time, Satan still stirs up opposers of
true worship to incite the authorities to place bans
on our preaching work. Opposers have leveled a variety of charges against God’s people. One is that we
3, 4. (a) What time-tested method has Satan used to attack God’s
people? (b) What will we consider in this chapter and the following
two?
238

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

are disturbers of public order—troublemakers. Another is that we are seditionists; still another, that
we are commercial salesmen—peddlers. At the appropriate times, our brothers have gone to court to
prove such accusations to be false. What has been
the result of these cases? How do court verdicts delivered decades ago a?ect you personally today? Let
us examine a few court cases to see in what ways
they have helped “in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.”—Phil. 1:7.
4

In this chapter we will focus on how we have de-

fended our right to have the freedom to preach. The
following two chapters will examine some of the legal battles that we have fought in our struggle to remain no part of the world and live by Kingdom standards.

5

Troublemakers—Or Loyal
Advocates of God’s Kingdom?
In the late 1930’s, cities and states throughout

the United States of America sought to force Jehovah’s
Witnesses to obtain some form of legal permit or
5. In the late 1930’s, why were Kingdom preachers arrested, and what
action was considered by those taking the lead?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

239

license in order to engage in their ministry. But our
brothers did not apply for licenses. A license can be
revoked, and they believed that no government had
the authority to interfere with Jesus’ command for
Christians to preach the Kingdom message. (Mark
13:10) Consequently, hundreds of Kingdom preachers were arrested. In response, those taking the lead
in the organization considered going to court. They
hoped to demonstrate that the State had imposed
unlawful restrictions on the Witnesses’ right to practice their religion freely. And in 1938 an incident occurred that led to a landmark court case. What happened?
6

On Tuesday morning, April 26, 1938, Newton

Cantwell, aged 60; his wife, Esther; and their sons
Henry, Russell, and Jesse—all ?ve of them special
pioneers—set out for a day of preaching in the city
of New Haven, Connecticut. Actually, they were prepared to be away for longer than a day. Why? They
had already been arrested on several occasions, so
they realized that they could be arrested again. Yet,
6, 7. What happened to the Cantwell family?
240

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

that prospect did not dampen the desire of the Cantwells to preach the Kingdom message. They arrived
in New Haven in two cars. Newton drove the family car loaded with Bible literature and portable
phonographs, while 22-year-old Henry drove a sound
car. Indeed, as anticipated, within hours they were
stopped by the police.
7

First, Russell, aged 18, was arrested, and then

Newton and Esther. From a distance, Jesse, aged 16,
looked on as his parents and brother were led away
by the police. Henry was preaching in another part
of town, so young Jesse was left by himself. Still, he
picked up his phonograph and continued preaching.
Two Catholic men let Jesse play a record of Brother Rutherford’s lecture entitled “Enemies.” But as
they listened to the lecture, the men got so angry that they wanted to strike Jesse. Calmly, Jesse
walked away from them, but shortly thereafter, a
policeman stopped him. So, Jesse too ended up in
custody. The police did not charge Sister Cantwell,
but they did charge Brother Cantwell and his sons.
However, they were released on bail that same day.
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

241

A few months later, in September 1938, the Cantwell family appeared before the trial court in New
Haven. Newton, Russell, and Jesse were convicted of
soliciting donations without a license. Despite appeals to the Supreme Court of Connecticut, Jesse
was found guilty of inciting a breach of peace—of
being a troublemaker. Why? Because the two Catholic men who had listened to the record testi?ed in
court that the lecture insulted their religion and provoked them. To challenge the convictions, the responsible brothers in our organization appealed to
the U.S. Supreme Court—the highest court of the
land.
8

Starting on March 29, 1940, Chief Justice
Charles E. Hughes and eight associate judges listened to the arguments presented by Brother Hayden Covington, a lawyer for Jehovah’s Witnesses.1[1]
9

1[1] This case, Cantwell v. State of Connecticut, was the ?rst of 43
cases before the U.S. Supreme Court that Brother Hayden Covington would handle in defense of the brothers. He died in 1978.
His widow, Dorothy, served faithfully until her death in 2015 at
92 years of age.

8. Why did the court ?nd Jesse Cantwell guilty of being a troublemaker?
9, 10. (a) How did the U.S. Supreme Court rule in the case of the
Cantwell family? (b) How do we still bene?t from that ruling?
242

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

When the attorney for the state of Connecticut presented his arguments in an e?ort to prove that the
Witnesses were troublemakers, one justice asked:
“Was it not true that the message that Christ Jesus
proclaimed was unpopular in his day?” The state’s
attorney replied: “It was, and, if I remember my Bible correctly, it also tells what happened to Jesus for
proclaiming that message.” What a revealing statement! Unwittingly, the attorney grouped the Witnesses with Jesus and grouped the state with those
who convicted him. On May 20, 1940, the Court
unanimously ruled in favor of the Witnesses.
What was the signi?cance of the Court’s ruling?
It expanded protection of the right to the free exercise of religion so that no federal, state, or local government could lawfully limit religious freedom. Further, the Court found in Jesse’s conduct “no . . .
menace to public peace and order.” Hence, the ruling clearly established that Jehovah’s Witnesses are
not disturbers of public order. What a decisive legal
victory for God’s servants! How do we still bene?t
from it? A lawyer who is a Witness notes: “The right
to exercise our religion freely without fear of unfair
10

KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

243

restrictions allows us as Witnesses today to share a
message of hope with others in the communities
where we live.”
11

S editionists—Or Proclaimers of Truth?
During the 1940’s, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cana-

da faced ?erce opposition. Hence, in 1946, to publicize the State’s disregard for the right to freedom of
worship, our brothers there held a 16-day campaign
in which they distributed a tract entitled Quebec’s
Burning Hate for God and Christ and Freedom Is the
Shame of All Canada. This four-page tract exposed in
detail the clergy-instigated riots, police brutality,
and mob violence committed against our brothers in
the province of Quebec. “Lawless arrests of Jehovah’s witnesses continue,” stated the tract. “There
are about 800 charges stacked up against Jehovah’s
witnesses in Greater Montreal.”
12

Quebec’s Premier Maurice Duplessis, working

hand in glove with Roman Catholic Cardinal Villeneuve, reacted to the tract by declaring a “war with11. What campaign did our brothers in Canada carry out, and why?
12. (a) How did opposers react to the tract campaign? (b) Our brothers were charged with what crime? (See also footnote.)
244

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

out mercy” against the Witnesses. The number of
prosecutions quickly doubled from 800 to 1,600.
“The police arrested us so many times that we lost
count,” said a pioneer sister. Witnesses who were
caught distributing the tract were charged with the
crime of publishing “seditious libel.”1[2]
In 1947, Brother Aimé Boucher and his daughters Gisèle, aged 18, and Lucille, aged 11, were the
13

?rst to be tried in court on charges of sedition. They
had distributed Quebec’s Burning Hate tracts near
their farm in the hills south of Quebec City, but it
was hard to picture them as lawless troublemakers.
Brother Boucher was a humble and mild man who
quietly tended his small farm and occasionally traveled into town by horse and buggy. Still, his family
had endured some of the very abuses mentioned in
the tract. The trial court judge, who hated Witnesses,
refused to admit evidence that proved the Bouchers’
innocence. Instead, he accepted the prosecution’s
1[2] The charge was based on a law enacted in 1606. It allowed a
jury to declare a person guilty if they felt that what that one said
promoted hostility—even if what was said was true.

13. Who were the ?rst to be tried on charges of sedition, and how did
the court rule?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

245

position that the tract stirred up ill will and that
thus the Bouchers should be found guilty. So the
judge’s view boiled down to this: It is a crime to tell
the truth! Aimé and Gisèle were convicted of seditious libel, and even young Lucille spent two days
locked in jail. The brothers appealed to the Supreme
Court of Canada, the land’s highest court, which
agreed to hear the case.
Meanwhile, our courageous brothers and sisters
in Quebec continued to preach the Kingdom message in the face of unrelenting and violent attacks
—often with outstanding results. During the four
years after the start of the tract campaign in 1946,
the number of Witnesses in Quebec increased from
300 to 1,000!1[3]
14

In June 1950, the full Supreme Court of Canada, made up of nine justices, heard the case of Aimé
15

1[3] In 1950, 164 full-time ministers served in Quebec—including
63 Gilead graduates who had willingly accepted their assignment
despite the ?erce opposition that awaited them.

14. How did the brothers in Quebec react during the years of persecution?
15, 16. (a) How did the Supreme Court of Canada rule in the case
of the B oucher family? (b) What e?ect did this victory have on our
brothers and on others?
246

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Boucher. Six months later, on December 18, 1950,
the Court ruled in our favor. Why? Brother Glen
How, a lawyer for the Witnesses, explained that the
Court agreed with the argument presented by the defense that “sedition” requires incitement to violence
or insurrection against government. The tract, however, “contained no such incitements and was therefore a lawful form of free speech.” Brother How
added: “I saw ?rsthand how Jehovah gave the victory.”1[4]
16 The Supreme Court’s decision was, indeed, a resounding victory for God’s Kingdom. It eliminated
the basis for all the other 122 pending cases in which
Witnesses in Quebec had been charged with seditious libel. Further, the Court’s ruling meant that
citizens of Canada and the Commonwealth now had
the freedom to voice their concerns over the manner
of government. Moreover, this victory broke the
back of Quebec’s Church-State attack on the liberties of Jehovah’s Witnesses.2[5]
1[4] Brother W. Glen How was a courageous attorney who, from
1943 to 2003, skillfully fought hundreds of legal battles for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Canada and abroad.
2[5] For more details of this case, see the article “The Battle Is
Not Yours, but God’s” in the April 22, 2000, issue of Awake! pages 18-24.
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

247

Peddlers—Or Zealous Heralds of God’s Kingdom?
17 Like the early Christians, Jehovah’s servants today “are not peddlers of the word of God.” (Read
2 Corinthians 2:17.) Still, some governments try to
control our ministerial activities by means of laws
that regulate commerce. Let us consider two of the
court cases that ruled on the question of whether Jehovah’s Witnesses are peddlers or are ministers.
18

Denmark. On October 1, 1932, a law took e?ect

that made it illegal to sell printed material without
a peddler’s license. Our brothers, however, did not
apply for any license. The next day, ?ve publishers
spent the day preaching in Roskilde, a town some
20 miles west of Copenhagen, the capital. At day’s
end, one of the publishers, August Lehmann, was
missing. He had been arrested for selling goods without a license.
19

On December 19, 1932, August Lehmann ap-

peared in court. He testi?ed that he had called on
people to o?er Bible literature, but he denied that
17. How do some governments try to control our preaching activities?
18, 19. How did authorities in Denmark try to restrain the preaching
work?
248

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

he was peddling. The trial court agreed with him. It
stated: “The defendant . . . is able to support himself
?nancially, and [he] has not received any economic bene?t nor had any intentions to receive such,
but instead his activities have caused him ?nancial
loss.” Siding with the Witnesses, the court ruled
that Lehmann’s activity could not “be characterized as trade.” The adversaries of God’s people,
though, were determined to restrain the preaching
work throughout the land. (Ps. 94:20) The public
prosecutor appealed all the way to the country’s Supreme Court. How did our brothers respond?
20

In the week leading up to the Supreme Court

hearing, Witnesses throughout Denmark stepped up
their preaching activities. On Tuesday, October 3,
1933, the Supreme Court announced its decision. It
agreed with the lower court that August Lehmann
had not broken the law. This ruling meant that the
Witnesses could continue to preach freely. To express their gratitude to Jehovah for giving this legal victory, the brothers and sisters increased their
20. How did the Supreme Court of Denmark rule, and what was our
brothers’ reaction?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

249

preaching activities even more. Ever since that Court
decision, our brothers in Denmark have been able to
carry out their ministry without government interference.
21

United States. On Sunday, February 25, 1940, pio-

neer Robert Murdock, Jr., and seven other Witnesses were arrested while preaching in Jeannette, a city
near Pittsburgh, in the state of Pennsylvania. They
were convicted of failing to buy a license to o?er literature. On appeal, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed
to hear the case.
22

On May 3, 1943, the Supreme Court announced

its ruling, which came out in defense of the Witnesses. The Court objected to the requirement of obtaining a license because that imposed “a charge for the
enjoyment of a right granted by the Federal Constitution.” The Court invalidated the city ordinance as
“an abridgment of freedom of press and a restraint
on the free exercise of religion.” In delivering the
Court’s majority opinion, Justice William O. Douglas stated that the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses “is
21, 22. What was the decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in the case
of Brother Murdock?
250

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

more than preaching; it is more than distribution of
religious literature. It is a combination of both.” He
added: “This form of religious activity occupies the
same high estate . . . as do worship in the churches
and preaching from the pulpits.”
This Supreme Court ruling constituted a major
legal victory for God’s people. It a?rmed what we
23

truly are—Christian ministers, not commercial salesmen. On that memorable day in 1943, Jehovah’s Witnesses won 12 of their 13 cases before the Supreme
Court, including the Murdock case. These court decisions have served as a powerful precedent in more
recent court cases in which our opposers have again
challenged our right to preach the Kingdom message
publicly and from house to house.
“We Must Obey God as Ruler Rather Than Men”
24 As Jehovah’s servants, we deeply appreciate it
when governments grant us the legal right to preach
the Kingdom message freely. However, when a government bans our preaching work, we simply adjust our methods, continuing our work in any way
23. Why are the court victories of 1943 important for us today?
24. How do we react when a government bans our preaching work?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

251

possible. Like the apostles, “we must obey God as
ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29; Matt. 28:19, 20)
At the same time, we appeal to the courts to lift the
ban on our activities. Consider two examples.
25

Nicaragua. On November 19, 1952, missionary

and branch servant Donovan Munsterman stepped
into the O?ce of Immigration in Managua, the capital. He had been ordered to appear before Captain Arnoldo García, who headed the o?ce. The captain told Donovan that all of Jehovah’s Witnesses in
Nicaragua were “prohibited to continue preaching
their doctrines and promoting their religious activities.” When asked why, Captain García explained
that the Witnesses did not have permission from the
minister of government to perform their ministry
and that they were accused of being communists.
Who were our accusers? The Roman Catholic clergy.
26

Brother Munsterman immediately appealed to

the Ministry of Government and Religions as well as
to President Anastasio Somoza García, but to no
avail. So the brothers adjusted their methods. They
25, 26. What events in Nicaragua led to a Supreme Court case there,
and what was the outcome?
252

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

closed the Kingdom Hall, met in smaller groups, and
stopped street witnessing, but they still preached the
Kingdom message. At the same time, they ?led a petition for injunction with the Supreme Court of Nicaragua, asking the Court to invalidate the ban. Newspapers widely reported the ban and the contents of
the petition, and the Supreme Court agreed to hear
the case. What was the outcome? On June 19, 1953,
the Supreme Court published its unanimous decision
in favor of the Witnesses. The Court found that the
ban violated constitutional guarantees of freedom of
expression, conscience, and manifestation of beliefs.
It also ordered that relations between the government of Nicaragua and the Witnesses be restored to
their former state.
27

Nicaraguans were amazed that the Supreme

Court had sided with the Witnesses. Until then, the
in?uence of the clergy had been so strong that the
Court avoided con?icts with them. Also, the power
of government o?cials was so great that the Court
seldom went against their decisions. Our brothers
27. Why were the people of Nicaragua amazed at the Court’s decision, and how did the brothers view this victory?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

253

were con?dent that they received this victory because they had received protection from their King
and had continued preaching.—Acts 1:8.
Zaire. In the mid-1980’s, there were about 35,000
Witnesses in Zaire, now the Democratic Republic of
Congo. To keep up with the steady growth of Kingdom activities, the branch was constructing new facilities. In December 1985, an international convention was held in the capital city, Kinshasa, and
32,000 delegates from many parts of the world ?lled
the city’s stadium. But then, conditions for Jehovah’s
servants began to change. What happened?
28

Brother Marcel Filteau, a missionary from Quebec, Canada, who had experienced the persecution
of the Duplessis regime, served in Zaire at the time.
He related what took place: “On March 12, 1986, the
responsible brothers were handed a letter that declared the association of Jehovah’s Witnesses of
Zaire illegal.” The ban was signed by the country’s
president, Mobutu Sese Seko.
29

30

The next day the national radio announced:

28, 29. In the mid-1980’s, what turn of events took place in Zaire?
30. The Branch Committee needed to make what weighty decision, and
what did they decide to do?
254

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“We shall never again hear of Jehovah’s Witnesses in [Zaire].” Instant persecution followed. Kingdom Halls were destroyed, and our brothers were
robbed, arrested, imprisoned, and beaten. Even Witness children were put in prison. On October 12,
1988, the government seized our organization’s belongings, and the Civil Guard, an army unit, occupied the branch property. The responsible brothers
?led an appeal with President Mobutu, but they did
not receive a reply. At that point, the Branch Committee had to make a weighty decision, “Shall we appeal to the Supreme Court, or shall we wait?” Timothy Holmes, who was a missionary and the country’s
Branch Committee coordinator at the time, recalls,
“We looked to Jehovah for wisdom and direction.”
After prayerful deliberation, the committee felt that
the time for legal action was not right. Instead, they
focused on caring for the brotherhood and on ?nding ways to continue the preaching work.
31

Several years passed. Pressure on the Witnesses

lessened, and respect for human rights increased in
31, 32. What remarkable decision did the Supreme Court of Zaire
make, and what e?ect did it have on our brothers?
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

255

the country. The Branch Committee concluded that
the time had come to challenge the ban by appealing to the Supreme Court of Justice of Zaire. Remarkably, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the
case. Then, on January 8, 1993, nearly seven years after the presidential ban order, the Court ruled that
the government’s action against the Witnesses had
been unlawful, and the ban was lifted. Just think of
what that meant! Putting their own lives at risk, the
justices had annulled a decision of the country’s
president! Says Brother Holmes, “During the period
of that litigation, we saw how Jehovah can change
things.” (Dan. 2:21) This victory forti?ed the faith of
our brothers. They felt that the King, Jesus, had directed his people to know when and how to act.
32

With the ban lifted, the branch o?ce was al-

lowed to bring in missionaries, build new branch facilities, and import Bible literature.1[6] What a joy it
is for God’s servants worldwide to observe how Jehovah protects the spiritual welfare of his people!
—Isa. 52:10.
1[6] The Civil Guard eventually vacated the branch property; but
new branch facilities were constructed in another location.
256

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“Jehovah Is My Helper”
33 Our review of some legal battles proves that Jesus has lived up to his promise: “I will give you
words and wisdom that all your opposers together
will not be able to resist or dispute.” (Read Luke
21:12-15.) At times, Jehovah has evidently raised up
modern-day Gamaliels to protect his people or has
moved courageous judges and lawyers to stand up
for justice. Jehovah has blunted the weapons of
our opposers. (Read Isaiah 54:17.) Opposition cannot
stop God’s work.
Why are our legal victories so remarkable? Consider this: Jehovah’s Witnesses are not prominent or
in?uential. We do not vote, support political campaigns, or lobby politicians. Moreover, those of us
drawn into high court cases generally are considered
“uneducated and ordinary.” (Acts 4:13) So, humanly
speaking, the courts have little incentive to rule
against our powerful religious and political opposers and to come to our aid. Nevertheless, courts have
34

33. What do we learn from this brief review of a few court cases?
34. Why are our legal victories so remarkable, and what do they prove?
(See also the box “Noteworthy High Court Victories That Advanced
Kingdom Preaching.”)
KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

257

repeatedly decided in our favor! Our legal victories
prove that we walk “in the sight of God and in company with Christ.” (2 Cor. 2:17) Hence, with the
apostle Paul, we declare: “Jehovah is my helper; I
will not be afraid.”—Heb. 13:6.

258

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How did the courts establish that we are
ministers, not troublemakers, seditionists, or
peddlers?
? How do we still bene?t from past legal
victories?
? When our preaching work is banned, how do
we respond?
? From a human viewpoint, why is it
remarkable that Jehovah’s people have won so
many landmark court cases?
? How has this review of legal battles
strengthened your faith?

KINGDOM PREACHERS TAKE THEIR CASE TO COURT

259

NOTEWORTHY HIGH COURT VICTORIES
THAT ADVANCED KINGD OM PREACHING
DECISION November 11, 1927
COUNTRY Switzerland
ISSUE Freedom of belief.
FACTS A police o?cer stops Brother Adolf Huber in
his preaching work, claims that our brother is disturbing
religious peace, and con?scates his Bible lea?ets.
RULING Before the Federal Supreme Court, Brother Huber challenges the police o?cer’s actions. The Court
?nds that con?scating religious tracts is a violation of
“freedom of belief.”
IMPACT The ruling stops police interference with the
Bible Students’ ministry.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION July 9, 1935
COUNTRY Romania
ISSUE Freedom of expression.
FACTS Six Witnesses are arrested for distributing books
that are “against public order and state security.” The
brothers are sentenced to 15 days in jail.
RULING The High Court of Cassation and Justice
(Supreme Court) ?nds that the Witnesses carry out their
activities peacefully, that their literature is no danger to
260

public order, and that they have the right to share their
opinion.
IMPACT This ruling, along with others among 530 Witness
cases heard from 1933 to 1939, guaranteed constitutional
rights that allowed the brothers to keep preaching.
Currently, our preaching work can be carried out freely.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION March 17, 1953
COUNTRY Netherlands
ISSUE Freedom of expression and of press.
FACTS Brother Pieter Havenaar is arrested for violating
an ordinance that allows the o?ering of literature only on
Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
RULING The Supreme Court ?nds the restriction too
far-reaching.
IMPACT This decision invalidates any ordinance that
limits the right to o?er printed material to the extent that
it becomes virtually impossible to engage in that activity.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION October 6, 1953
COUNTRY Canada
ISSUE Freedom of worship and of expression.
FACTS A Quebec City bylaw prohibits distributing
literature without a police permit. Traveling overseer
Brother Laurier Saumur spends three months in jail for
violating this bylaw.
261

RULING The Supreme Court ?nds the application of the
bylaw to the Witnesses illegal. The Court recognizes that
the public distribution of printed Bible messages is part of
the Christian worship of Jehovah’s Witnesses, which is
constitutionally protected from censorship.
IMPACT The decision dismisses over 1,600 bylaw charges
in the province of Quebec.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION July 13, 1983
COUNTRY Serbia
ISSUE Freedom of expression and of press.
FACTS Two sisters are arrested for distributing Bible
literature. They are charged with “o?ences against Public
Order and Peace” and are imprisoned for ?ve days.
RULING The Supreme Court ?nds no violation of law and
no basis for the claim that they are disturbing the peace.
IMPACT After this legal victory, arrests and con?scation
of literature decrease.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION May 26, 1986
COUNTRY Turkey
ISSUE Freedom of belief.
FACTS After three Witness families apply to register their
religion as Jehovah’s Witnesses, 23 brothers and sisters are
imprisoned for trying to change the social or political
order.
262

RULING The Supreme Court annuls the convictions,
exonerates the Witnesses, and upholds the right of
freedom of belief for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
IMPACT The decision eliminates arrests for Christian
activity and expands religious liberty in Turkey for all
citizens.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION May 25, 1993
COUNTRY Greece
ISSUE Freedom to manifest one’s religion.
FACTS In 1986, for the 18th time, Brother Minos
Kokkinakis is convicted of proselytism. From 1938 to 1992,
the Greek law prohibiting proselytism was the basis for
over 19,000 arrests of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
RULING The European Court of Human Rights ?nds
violation of freedom of thought, conscience, and religion;
?nds unjusti?ed interference with freedom to manifest
one’s religion; and upholds the status of Jehovah’s
Witnesses as a “known religion.”
IMPACT The Greek government directs all judicial
authorities not to violate the Kokkinakis decision,
eliminating further convictions for proselytism.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

DECISION June 17, 2002
COUNTRY United States
ISSUE Freedom of expression.
263

FACTS The village of Stratton in the state of Ohio
issues an ordinance that requires anyone engaging in
door-to-door activity to obtain a permit. Federal trial and
appeals courts hold that the ordinance is constitutional.
RULING The Supreme Court strikes down the ordinance
as unconstitutional and rea?rms the right to free exercise
of religion and the right to freedom of expression. The
Court notes that the Witnesses explained that they “derive
their authority to preach from Scripture.”
IMPACT Hundreds of municipalities desist from applying
similar ordinances to the ministry of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

264

14

Loyally Supporting God’s
Government and No Other

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Out of loyalty to the Kingdom, God’s people remain no part
of the world

JESUS stood before Pilate, the Jewish nation’s most
powerful secular judge, and stated a principle that
has guided His genuine followers down to our day.
“My Kingdom is no part of this world,” he said. “If
my Kingdom were part of this world, my attendants
would have fought that I should not be handed over
to the Jews. But as it is, my Kingdom is not from
this source.” (John 18:36) Pilate had Jesus executed,
but the victory was short-lived. Jesus was resurrected. Emperors of the mighty Roman Empire tried to
crush Christ’s followers, but their e?orts were futile.
Christians spread the Kingdom message throughout
the ancient world.—Col. 1:23.
2

After the Kingdom was established in 1914, some

1, 2. (a) What principle has guided Jesus’ followers down to our day?
(b) How have enemies tried to conquer us, and with what result?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

265

of the strongest military powers in history tried to
wipe out God’s people. But none have conquered us.
Many governments and political factions tried to
force us to take sides in their con?icts. They did not
succeed in dividing us. Today, subjects of the Kingdom live in virtually every nation on earth. Even so,
we are united in a genuine global brotherhood, remaining strictly neutral as to the world’s political affairs. Our unity provides compelling evidence that
God’s Kingdom rules and that the King Jesus Christ
continues to direct, re?ne, and protect his subjects.
Consider how he has done so, and note just some of
the faith-strengthening legal victories he has given us
as we continue to remain “no part of the world.”
—John 17:14.
3

An Issue Thrust to the Fore
Following the Kingdom’s birth, war raged in

heaven, and then Satan was cast down to the earth.
(Read Revelation 12:7-10, 12.) A war also raged on
earth, one that tested the resolve of God’s people.
3, 4. (a) What events took place at the time of the Kingdom’s birth?
(b) Have God’s people always fully understood the issue of neutrality? Explain.
266

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

They were determined to follow Jesus’ example and
be no part of the world. But at ?rst they did not fully understand how much it would require of them to
keep out of all political matters.
4

For example, Volume VI of the Millennial Dawn

series,1[1] which was published in 1904, encouraged
Christians to avoid participation in war. However, it
reasoned that if a Christian was conscripted, he
should strive to obtain some form of noncombatant
service. If that failed and he was sent into combat,
he should ensure that he did not commit murder.
Commenting on the situation at that time, Herbert
Senior, who lived in Britain and was baptized in
1905, said: “There was a lot of confusion among the
brothers and no clear advice as to whether it would
be right to join the army as a soldier but only for
noncombatant work.”
5

However, The Watch Tower of September 1, 1915,

began to re?ne our understanding of this issue.
1[1] This volume is also known by the title The New Creation. Later, the Millennial Dawn volumes were called Studies in the Scriptures.

5. How did The Watch Tower of September 1, 1915, begin to re?ne
our understanding?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

267

Regarding the recommendations made in Studies in
the Scriptures, it said: “We wonder if such a course
would not mean compromise.” But what if a Christian were threatened with being shot for refusing a
uniform and military service? The article reasoned:
“Would it be any worse to be shot because of loyalty to the Prince of Peace and refusal to disobey His
order than to be shot while under the banner of
these earthly kings and apparently giving them support and, in appearance at least, compromising the
teachings of our Heavenly King? Of the two deaths
we would prefer the former—prefer to die because
of faithfulness to our Heavenly King.” Despite that
forceful statement, the article concluded: “We are
not urging this course. We are merely suggesting it.”
6

Some brothers saw the issue clearly and met it

head-on. Herbert Senior, quoted earlier, said: “To
me, there was no di?erence in principle between unloading shells from a ship [noncombatant service]
and putting those shells into a gun to be ?red.”
(Luke 16:10) As a result of his conscientious objec6. What have you learned from the example of Brother Herbert Senior?
268

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

tion to military service, Brother Senior was sent to
prison. He and 4 other brothers were among a group
of 16 conscientious objectors, including men from
other religious denominations, who served some of
their time at Richmond prison in Britain and later
became known as the Richmond 16. At one point,
Herbert and others like him were secretly shipped to
the front lines in France. There, they were sentenced
to be shot. He and a number of others were lined up
in front of a ?ring squad, but they were not killed.
Instead, their sentence was commuted to ten years
in prison.
By the time World War II broke out, Jehovah’s
people as a whole had come to see more clearly what
it meant to be neutral and what was required if they
were to follow Jesus’ example. (Matt. 26:51-53; John
17:14-16; 1 Pet. 2:21) For instance, the November 1,
1939, issue of The Watchtower carried the landmark
article entitled “Neutrality,” which stated: “The rule
by which Jehovah’s covenant people must now be
governed is that of strict neutrality between the nations at war.” Regarding that article, Simon Kraker,
7

7. By the start of World War II, what had God’s people come to see?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

269

who later served at headquarters, in Brooklyn, New
York, said: “I learned to appreciate that God’s people were to be at peace with everyone, even amid
threats of war.” That spiritual food was provided at
the proper time and helped to brace God’s people
for an unprecedented assault on their loyalty to the
Kingdom.
8

Threatened by a “River” of Opposition
The apostle John prophesied that after the King-

dom’s birth in 1914, the dragon, Satan the Devil,
would attempt to wipe out the supporters of God’s
Kingdom by spewing out a symbolic river from its
mouth.1[2] (Read Revelation 12:9, 15.) How was John’s
prophecy ful?lled? From the 1920’s onward, there
was a surge of opposition against God’s people. Like
many other brothers who lived in North America
during the second world war, Brother Kraker was
thrown into prison for his loyalty to God’s Kingdom.
In fact, during the war, Jehovah’s Witnesses made up
more than two thirds of all inmates who because of
1[2] For a discussion of this prophecy, see the publication Revelation—Its Grand Climax At Hand!, chapter 27, pages 184-186.

8, 9. How was the apostle John’s prophecy ful?lled?
270

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“HE DIED FOR G OD’S HONOR”
DURING the second world war, Jehovah’s Witnesses
were a small minority in Nazi Germany. Historian Detlef
Garbe writes that in spite of that fact, “the majority of
people who were condemned as conscientious objectors
by the military courts . . . in the Third Reich were Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Gerhard Steinacher, of Austria, aged 19,
was one of those. Just days after the start of World War II,
Nazi authorities arrested him for refusing to join the German army.
In November 1939, Gerhard received the sentence of
death. That month he wrote from prison: “I want nothing
else but to honor God, to keep his commandments, and to
ask him to receive us into his Kingdom, where eternal life
and peace will be.”
On March 29, 1940, the day before his execution, Gerhard bid his parents farewell: “I am still a child. Only if
the Lord gives me strength can I stand, and this is what I
ask.” Gerhard was executed at about six o’clock the next
morning, likely by guillotine. His epitaph reads: “He died
for God’s honor.”

religious objections to the war were being held in
federal prisons in the United States.
9 The Devil and his agents were intent on breaking the integrity of Kingdom subjects no matter
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

271

where they lived. Throughout Africa, Europe, and
the United States, they were brought before courts
and parole boards. Because of their unwavering determination to remain neutral, they were imprisoned,
beaten, and maimed. In Germany, God’s people
faced enormous pressure because they refused to
heil Hitler or join the war e?ort. An estimated 6,000
were detained in prison camps during the Nazi era,
and more than 1,600 German and non-German Witnesses died at the hands of their tormentors. Even
so, the Devil was unable to in?ict any permanent
harm on God’s people.—Mark 8:34, 35.
10

“The Earth” Swallows “the River”
The prophecy recorded by the apostle John re-

vealed that “the earth”—elements of this system that
are more reasonable—would swallow “the river” of
persecution, thus coming to the aid of God’s people.
How has that part of the prophecy been ful?lled? In
the decades following World War II, “the earth” has
often intervened in behalf of the faithful supporters
of the Messianic Kingdom. (Read Revelation 12:16.)
10. What does “the earth” symbolize, and how has it intervened in behalf of God’s people?
272

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

For example, various in?uential courts have protected the rights of Jehovah’s Witnesses to refuse military service and to decline when asked to participate
in nationalistic ceremonies. First, consider just some
of the major victories that Jehovah has given his
people regarding the issue of performing military
service.—Ps. 68:20.
11

United States. Anthony Sicurella was one of six

children raised by Witness parents. At age 15, he was
baptized. When he turned 21, he registered with the
draft board as a minister of religion. Two years later, in 1950, he applied for a reclassi?cation as a conscientious objector. Although the Federal Bureau
of Investigation’s report found nothing unfavorable,
the Department of Justice denied his claim. After
several court proceedings, the U.S. Supreme Court
heard Brother Sicurella’s case and reversed the lower court’s decision by ruling in favor of Brother Sicurella. This ruling helped to set a precedent for
other citizens of the United States who were conscientious objectors to military service.
11, 12. What issues did Brothers Sicurella and Thlimmenos face, and
what was the outcome?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

273

12

Greece. In 1983, Iakovos Thlimmenos was con-

victed of insubordination for refusing to wear a military uniform and was sentenced to prison. After his
release, he applied to become an accountant, but his
application was rejected because he had a criminal
record. He took the matter to court, but after losing
his case in the Greek courts, he applied to the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). In 2000,
the Grand Chamber of the ECHR, a panel consisting of 17 judges, ruled in his favor, setting a precedent against discrimination. Before this ruling, over
3,500 brothers in Greece had criminal records because of being imprisoned for their neutral stand.
After this favorable decision, Greece passed a law to
clear those brothers of any criminal charges. Also, a
law giving all Greek citizens the right to perform alternative civilian service, which had been passed just
a few years before, was rea?rmed when the Constitution of Greece was revised.
13

Bulgaria. In 1994, Ivailo Stefanov was 19 when

he was drafted into the army. He refused to join the
13, 14. What lessons do you feel we can learn from the cases involving Ivailo Stefanov and Vahan Bayatyan?
274

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“Before entering the
army or to perform noncomcourtroom, I prayed
batant duties directed by the
fervently to Jehovah,
military. He was sentenced to
and then I felt how he
18 months in prison but apgave me calmness.”
pealed the decision, based on
—Ivailo Stefanov
his right as a conscientious
(See paragraph 13)
objector. His case was eventually referred to the ECHR. In 2001, before the case
could be heard, a friendly settlement was reached
with Brother Stefanov. The Bulgarian government
not only granted amnesty to Brother Stefanov but
also to all Bulgarian citizens who were willing to perform alternative civilian service.1[3]
Armenia. Vahan Bayatyan became eligible for
compulsory military service in 2001.2[4] He conscientiously objected to serving in the military but lost
every appeal in the domestic courts. In September 2002, he began serving a two-and-a-half-year
sentence but was released after serving ten and a
half months. During that time, he appealed to the
14

1[3] The settlement also required the Bulgarian government to
o?er alternative civilian service under civilian administration to all
conscientious objectors.
2[4] For a more complete account, see the November 1, 2012, issue of The Watchtower, pages 29-31.
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

275

ECHR, which heard his case. However, on October 27, 2009, that Court also ruled against him. The
verdict seemed to be a crushing blow to the brothers in Armenia who faced this issue. However, the
Grand Chamber of the ECHR reviewed the ruling.
On July 7, 2011, the Court ruled in favor of Vahan
Bayatyan. This was the ?rst time that the ECHR
recognized that conscientious objection to military
service based on one’s religious beliefs should be
protected under the right of freedom of thought,
conscience, and religion. That ruling protects the
rights not only of Jehovah’s Witnesses but of hundreds of millions of people in countries that are
members of the Council of Europe.1[5]
The Issue of Nationalistic Ceremonies
15 Jehovah’s people remain loyal to the Messianic
Kingdom not only by refusing military service but
also by respectfully declining to join in nationalistic
ceremonies. Especially since the outbreak of World
1[5] Over a 20-year span, the government of Armenia had imprisoned more than 450 young Witnesses. In November 2013, the last
of these men were released from prison.

15. Why do Jehovah’s people refuse to join in nationalistic ceremonies?
276

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

War II, a wave of nationalistic fervor has swept the
globe. Citizens of many countries have been required
to vow allegiance to their homeland by reciting a
pledge, singing a national anthem, or saluting a
country’s ?ag. However, we give our exclusive devotion to Jehovah. (Ex. 20:4, 5) As a result, we have experienced a ?ood of persecution. Even so, Jehovah
has again used “the earth” to swallow up some of
this opposition. Note just a few of the remarkable
victories that Jehovah through Christ has granted us
in this matter.—Ps. 3:8.
16 United States. In 1940, the U.S. Supreme Court
ruled 8 to 1 against Jehovah’s Witnesses in the case
known as Minersville School District v. Gobitis. Lillian
Gobitas,1[6] aged 12, and her brother William, aged
10, wanted to remain loyal to Jehovah, so they refused to salute the ?ag or recite the pledge. As a result, they were expelled from school. Their case
came before the Supreme Court, and the Court concluded that the school’s actions were constitutional
because they were in the interest of “national unity.”
1[6] The family name was misspelled in the court records.

16, 17. What issue did Lillian and William Gobitas face, and what
have you learned from their case?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

277

That ruling ignited a ?restorm of persecution. More
Witness children were expelled from school, adult
Witnesses lost their jobs, and a number of Witnesses su?ered vicious attacks from mobs. The book The
Lustre of Our Country states that the “persecution of
Witnesses from 1941 to 1943 was the greatest outbreak of religious intolerance in twentieth-century
America.”
17

The victory for God’s enemies was short-lived.

In 1943, the Supreme Court considered another case
similar to the Gobitis case. It is known as West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette. This time,
the Supreme Court granted victory to Jehovah’s Witnesses. It was the ?rst time in U.S. history that the
Supreme Court had reversed itself in such a short
period of time. After that ruling, the overt persecution of Jehovah’s people in the United States drastically decreased. In the process, the rights of all citizens of the United States were strengthened.
18

Argentina. Pablo and Hugo Barros, ages eight

and seven respectively, were expelled from school in
18, 19. What did Pablo Barros say helped him to remain strong, and
how can other servants of Jehovah imitate his example?
278

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

1976 for not participating in a ?ag-raising ceremony.
On one occasion, the headmistress shoved Pablo and
hit him on the head. She made both boys stay after
school for an hour, trying to force them to participate in patriotic ceremonies. Recalling the ordeal,
Pablo said: “Without Jehovah’s help, I would not
have been able to withstand the pressure to break my
integrity.”
When the case came to court, the judge upheld
the school’s decision to expel Pablo and Hugo. However, their case was appealed to the Supreme Court
of Argentina. In 1979, that Court reversed the lower
court’s decision, stating: “Said punishment [expulsion] contradicts the constitutional right to learn
(Article 14) and the duty of the State to ensure primary education (Article 5).” That victory bene?ted approximately 1,000 Witness children. Some had
their expulsions stopped and others, like young Pablo and Hugo, were readmitted to public schools.
19

20

Philippines. In 1990, Roel Embralinag,1[7] aged 9,

1[7] The family name was misspelled as Ebralinag in the court
records.

20, 21. How does the case involving Roel and Emily Embralinag
strengthen your faith?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

279

and his sister Emily, aged 10, along with approximately 66 other Witness students, were expelled
from school for not saluting the ?ag. Roel and
Emily’s father, Leonardo, tried to reason with the
school authorities, but to no avail. As matters intensi?ed, Leonardo ?led a petition to the Supreme
Court. Leonardo had no money and no lawyer to represent him. The family prayed fervently to Jehovah
for direction. All the while, the children were being ridiculed and taunted. Leonardo felt he had no
chance of winning the case because he had no legal
training.
21

As events turned out, the family was represent-

ed by Felino Ganal, an attorney who had previously
been employed by one of the most reputable law
?rms in the country. At the time of the case, Brother Ganal had left his corporate work and become
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. When the case came before the Supreme Court, the Court unanimously decided in favor of the Witnesses and annulled the expulsion orders. Again, those who tried to break the
integrity of God’s people failed.
280

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Neutrality Leads to Unity
22 Why have Jehovah’s people won so many landmark legal victories? We have no political in?uence.
Yet, in country after country and court after court,
fair-minded judges have protected us from the onslaught of tenacious opposers and, in the process,
have set precedents in constitutional law. Without a
doubt, Christ has backed our e?orts to gain those
victories. (Read Revelation 6:2.) Why do we ?ght such
legal battles? Our intent is not to reform the legal
system. Rather, our goal is to ensure that we can
continue to serve our King, Jesus Christ, without
hindrance.—Acts 4:29.
Amid a world divided by political strife and
warped by ingrained hatred, our reigning King, Jesus
Christ, has blessed the e?orts of his followers worldwide to maintain their neutral stand. Satan has failed
in his e?orts to divide and conquer us. The Kingdom has gathered millions who refuse to “learn war
anymore.” The very existence of our global, peaceful brotherhood is a miracle—it provides irrefutable
proof that God’s Kingdom rules!—Isa. 2:4.
23

22, 23. (a) Why have we won so many landmark legal victories?
(b) Our global, peaceful brotherhood is evidence of what?
LOYALLY SUPPORTING GOD’S GOVERNMENT AND NO OTHER

281

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How would you explain why Jehovah’s people
remain politically neutral?
? What do court victories teach you about
God’s Kingdom?
? How can you show that you support God’s
Kingdom and no other?

282

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

15

Fighting for Freedom to Worship

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

How Christ has helped his followers to ?ght for legal
recognition and the right to obey God’s laws

ARE you a citizen of God’s Kingdom? As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, you certainly are! And what is the
proof of your citizenship? Not a passport, nor some
other government document. Rather, the proof lies
in the way that you worship Jehovah God. True worship involves more than what you believe. It involves
what you do—your obedience to the laws of God’s
Kingdom. For all of us, our worship touches every
aspect of life, including the way we raise our families and even the way we respond to certain health
issues.
However, the world we live in does not always
respect our most cherished citizenship or its requirements. Some governments have tried to restrict our
worship or even stamp it out altogether. At times,
2

1, 2. (a) What is the proof of your citizenship in God’s Kingdom?
(b) Why have Jehovah’s Witnesses sometimes had to ?ght for religious
freedom?
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

283

Christ’s subjects have had to ?ght for the freedom to
live by the laws of the Messianic King. Is that surprising? No. Jehovah’s people in Bible times often
had to ?ght for the freedom to worship Jehovah.
3

In the days of Queen Esther, for example, God’s

people had to ?ght for their very existence. Why?
The wicked Prime Minister Haman suggested to Persian King Ahasuerus that all the Jews living in the
king’s realm be killed because their “laws are di?erent from those of all other peoples.” (Esther 3:8,
9, 13) Did Jehovah abandon his servants? No, he
blessed the e?orts of Esther and Mordecai as they
appealed to the Persian king to protect God’s people.—Esther 9:20-22.
4

What about modern times? As we saw in the pre-

ceding chapter, secular powers have, at times, opposed Jehovah’s Witnesses. In this chapter, we will
discuss some ways in which such governments have
tried to restrict our way of worship. We will focus
on three general areas: (1) our right to exist as an organization and to worship as we choose, (2) the free3. What ?ght did God’s people face in Queen Esther’s day?
4. What will we discuss in this chapter?
284

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

dom to choose medical treatment in harmony with
Bible principles, and (3) the right of parents to raise
children according to Jehovah’s standards. In each
area, we will see how loyal citizens of the Messianic
Kingdom have struggled valiantly to guard their precious citizenship and how their e?orts have been
blessed.
Struggling for Legal Recognition and Basic Freedoms
5 Do we need legal recognition from human governments in order to worship Jehovah? No, but legal
recognition makes it easier for us to carry on our
worship—for example, to meet freely in our own
Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls, to print and import Bible literature, and to share the good news
with our neighbors openly, without hindrance. In
many countries, Jehovah’s Witnesses are legally registered and enjoy the same freedoms to worship as
do the adherents of other legally recognized religions. What, though, has happened when governments have denied legal recognition or have tried to
restrict our basic freedoms?
5. Legal recognition o?ers what bene?ts to true Christians?
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

285

Australia. In the early 1940’s, the governorgeneral of Australia deemed our beliefs “prejudicial”
to the war e?ort. A ban was imposed. Witnesses were
unable to meet or preach openly, Bethel operations
were closed down, and Kingdom Halls were seized.
Merely possessing our Bible literature was prohibited. After operating in secret for several years, the
Australian Witnesses found relief at last. On June 14,
1943, the High Court of Australia reversed the ban.
6

Russia. Jehovah’s Witnesses spent decades under
Communist ban but were ?nally registered in 1991.
After the breakup of the former Soviet Union, we
were granted legal recognition in the Russian Federation in 1992. Before long, however, some opposers
—particularly those associated with the Russian Orthodox Church—were unnerved by the rapid growth
in our numbers. Opposers ?led a series of ?ve criminal complaints against Jehovah’s Witnesses between
1995 and 1998. Each time, the prosecutor found no
evidence of wrongdoing. The determined opposers
7

6. Jehovah’s Witnesses in Australia faced what challenge in the early
1940’s?
7, 8. Describe the ?ght for freedom of worship that our brothers in
Russia have waged over the years.
286

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

then ?led a civil complaint in 1998. The Witnesses prevailed at ?rst, but the opposers rejected the
verdict and the Witnesses lost on the appeal in
May 2001. A retrial began in October of that year,
leading to a decision in 2004 to liquidate the registered legal entity that the Witnesses use in Moscow
and ban its activities.
A wave of persecution followed. (Read 2 Timothy
3:12.) Witnesses faced harassment and assault. Religious literature was con?scated; renting or building
houses of worship was severely restricted. Imagine
how our brothers and sisters felt as they faced those
hardships! The Witnesses had applied to the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) in 2001, and
they submitted additional information to the Court
in 2004. In 2010, the ECHR reached its decision. The
Court saw clearly that religious intolerance was behind Russia’s ban on the Witnesses and ruled that
there was no reason to uphold the decisions of the
lower courts, since there had been no evidence of
wrongdoing on the part of any Witnesses. The Court
further noted that the ban was designed to strip the
Witnesses of their legal rights. The Court’s decision
8

FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

287

upheld the Witnesses’ right of freedom of religion.
Although various Russian authorities have failed to
comply with the ECHR ruling, God’s people in that
land have drawn great courage from such victories.
9

Greece. In 1983, Titos Manoussakis rented a

room in Heraklion, Crete, so that a small group of
Jehovah’s Witnesses could meet there for worship.
(Heb. 10:24, 25) Soon, though, an Orthodox priest
?led a complaint with government authorities, protesting the Witnesses’ use of the room for worship.
Why? Simply because the Witnesses’ beliefs di?er
from those of the Orthodox Church! Authorities initiated criminal proceedings against Titos Manoussakis and three other local Witnesses. They were
?ned and sentenced to two months’ imprisonment.
As loyal citizens of God’s Kingdom, the Witnesses
considered the court’s judgment to be a violation of
their freedom to worship, so they pursued their case
through the domestic courts and eventually applied
to the ECHR.
10

Finally, in 1996, the ECHR delivered a stunning

9-11. In Greece, how have Jehovah’s people struggled for the freedom
to worship together, and what have been the results?
288

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

blow to opposers of pure worship. The Court noted
that “Jehovah’s Witnesses come within the de?nition
of ‘known religion’ as provided for under Greek law”
and that the lower courts’ decisions had a “direct effect on applicants’ freedom of religion.” The Court
further found that it was not up to the government
of Greece to “determine whether religious beliefs or
the means used to express such beliefs are legitimate.” The sentences against the Witnesses were
overturned, and their freedom of worship was upheld!
Did that victory settle matters in Greece? Sadly, no. In 2012, a similar case was ?nally settled in
Kassandreia, Greece, after a nearly 12-year-long legal battle. In this case the opposition was mounted
by an Orthodox bishop. The Council of State, the
highest administrative court of Greece, settled the
matter in favor of God’s people. The decision cited
Greece’s own constitutional guarantee of freedom of
religion and refuted the oft repeated charge that Jehovah’s Witnesses are not a known religion. The
Court stated: “The doctrines of ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses’ are not hidden and, consequently, they profess a
11

FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

289

known religion.” Members of the small congregation
in Kassandreia rejoice that they are now able to hold
meetings for worship in their own Kingdom Hall.
12

France. Some opposers of God’s people have

used the tactic of “framing trouble in the name of
the law.” (Read Psalm 94:20.) For example, in the
mid-1990’s, tax authorities in France began an audit
of the ?nances of the Association Les Témoins de Jéhovah (ATJ), one of the legal entities under which Jehovah’s Witnesses operate in France. The minister of
the budget revealed the true objective of the audit:
“The audit could lead to judicial liquidation or criminal proceedings . . . , which would likely destabilize
the association’s operations or force it to cease
its activities in our territory.” Although the audit
turned up no irregularities, the tax authorities levied
a crippling tax against ATJ. If successful, the tactic
would have left our brothers with little choice but to
close the branch o?ce and sell the buildings in order to pay the huge tax. It was a heavy blow, but
God’s people did not give up. The Witnesses vig12, 13. In France, how have opposers tried to frame “trouble in the
name of the law,” and with what result?
290

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

orously protested this unjust treatment, ultimately
submitting the case to the ECHR in 2005.
The Court handed down its judgment on
June 30, 2011. It reasoned that the right to freedom
of religion should prevent the State, except in extreme cases, from assessing the legitimacy of religious beliefs or the way they are expressed. Further,
the Court stated: “The taxation . . . had the e?ect of
cutting o? the association’s vital resources, thereafter preventing it from ensuring its adherents the
free exercise of their worship in its practical aspects.” The Court unanimously decided in favor of
Jehovah’s Witnesses! To the delight of Jehovah’s people, the French government ?nally returned the tax
levied against ATJ with interest and, in compliance
with the Court’s order, removed the liens on the
branch property.
13

Like Esther and Mordecai of old, Jehovah’s people today ?ght for the freedom to worship Jehovah
in the way that he has commanded. (Esther 4:13-16)
Can you have a part? Yes. You can pray regularly for
your spiritual brothers and sisters who are currently
14

14. How can you play a part in the ?ght for freedom of worship?
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

291

su?ering on account of legal injustices. Such prayers
can be a powerful aid to our brothers and sisters under hardship and persecution. (Read James 5:16.)
Does Jehovah act on such prayers? Our victories in
court suggest that he certainly does!—Heb. 13:18, 19.

15

Freedom to Choose Medical Treatment
in Harmony With Our B eliefs
As we noted in Chapter 11, citizens of God’s

Kingdom have received clear Scriptural guidance to
avoid the misuse of blood, which has become so
common today. (Gen. 9:5, 6; Lev. 17:11; read Acts 15:
28, 29.) Although we do not accept blood transfusions, we want the best medical care possible for
ourselves and our loved ones as long as such treatment does not con?ict with God’s laws. The highest
courts of many nations have recognized that people
have the right to choose or to refuse medical treatment as their conscience and religious beliefs require. In some lands, however, God’s people have
faced daunting challenges in this regard. Consider
some examples.
15. What factors do God’s people take into account regarding the use
of blood?
292

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

16

Japan. Misae Takeda, a 63-year-old housewife in

Japan, needed major surgery. As a loyal citizen of
God’s Kingdom, she made clear to her doctor that
she wanted to be treated without blood. Yet, months
later, she was shocked to learn that she had been given a blood transfusion during her surgery. Feeling
violated and deceived, Sister Takeda ?led a lawsuit
against the doctors and the hospital in June 1993.
This modest, soft-spoken woman had unshakable
faith. She gave bold testimony before a full courtroom, remaining on the witness stand for over an
hour despite her failing strength. She appeared in
court for the last time just a month before she died.
Do we not admire her courage and faith? Sister Takeda said that she constantly petitioned Jehovah for
his blessing on her ?ght. She was con?dent that her
prayers would be answered. Were they?
17

Three years after Sister Takeda died, the Su-

preme Court of Japan ruled in her favor—agreeing
that it was wrong to give her a blood transfusion
against her express wishes. The February 29, 2000,
16, 17. What medical treatment did a sister in Japan receive that
proved shocking to her, and how were her prayers answered?
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

293

decision stated that “the right to decide” in such cases “must be respected as personal rights.” Thanks to
Sister Takeda’s determination to ?ght for her freedom to choose medical treatment in harmony with
her Bible-trained conscience, Witnesses in Japan can
now receive medical treatment without the fear of a
forced blood transfusion.
Argentina. How can citizens of the Kingdom prepare in case a medical decision needs to be made
while they are unconscious? We can carry on our
person a legal document that will speak for us, as
Pablo Albarracini did. In May 2012, he was the victim of an attempted robbery and was shot multiple
times. He was admitted to the hospital unconscious
and was thus unable to explain his stand regarding
blood transfusions. However, he had with him a duly
executed medical directive he had signed more than
four years earlier. Although his condition was serious and some doctors felt that to save his life, blood
transfusion was necessary, the medical sta? was pre18

18-20. (a) How did a court of appeals in Argentina uphold a person’s
right to refuse blood transfusions through use of a medical directive?
(b) Regarding the misuse of blood, how might we show submission to
Christ’s leadership?
294

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

pared to honor his wishes. However, Pablo’s father,
who was not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, obtained a
court order to overturn his son’s wishes.
The attorney representing Pablo’s wife immediately ?led an appeal. Within hours, the court of appeals overturned the lower court’s order and ruled
that the patient’s wishes, as expressed in the medical directive, should be respected. Pablo’s father appealed to Argentina’s Supreme Court. However, the
Supreme Court could ?nd “no reasons to doubt that
[Pablo’s medical directive expressing his refusal of a
blood transfusion] was formulated with discernment,
intention and freedom.” The Court stated: “Every capable and adult person has the ability to grant advance directives on [his] health, and may accept or
reject certain medical treatments . . . These directives must be accepted by the doctor in charge.”
19

Brother Albarracini has since recovered fully.
He and his wife are grateful that he had completed
a medical directive. By taking that simple—yet important—step, he showed his submission to Christ’s
rulership through God’s Kingdom. Have you and
your family taken similar measures?
20

FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

295

21

Canada. Generally, courts recognize the rights of

parents to determine the best medical care for their
children. At times, courts have even ruled that a
mature minor should be accorded respect when it
comes to making medical decisions. That was true
of April Cadoreth. At the age of 14, April was admitted to a hospital with severe internal bleeding. A few
months earlier, she had completed an Advance Medical Directive card with written instructions that
blood transfusions should not be administered to her
even in the event of an emergency. The attending physician chose to ignore April’s clearly expressed wishes and sought a court order to give her
blood. She was forcibly transfused with three units
of packed red blood cells. April later likened the experience to rape.
22

April and her parents turned to the courts for

justice. After two years, the case came before the Supreme Court of Canada. Though April technically
lost her constitutional challenge, the Court awarded
21-24. (a) How did the Supreme Court of Canada come to make a remarkable decision regarding minors and the use of blood? (b) How
might this case encourage young servants of Jehovah?
296

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

her legal costs and ruled in favor of her and other
mature minors who seek to exercise their right to decide for themselves their own medical treatment.
The Court stated: “In the context of medical treatment, young people under 16 should be permitted to
attempt to demonstrate that their views about a particular medical treatment decision re?ect a su?cient
degree of independence of thought and maturity.”
This case is signi?cant in that the Supreme
Court addressed the constitutional rights of mature
minors. Before this ruling, a Canadian court could
authorize medical treatment on a child under 16 as
long as the court felt that the treatment was in the
best interests of the child. But after this ruling, a
court cannot authorize any treatment against the
will of young people under the age of 16 without
?rst o?ering them the chance to prove that they are
mature enough to make their own decisions.
23

Was the three-year battle worth the e?ort? According to April, “Yes!” Now a regular pioneer and
in good health, she says: “To know that I’ve had a
small part in trying to glorify God’s name and prove
Satan a liar has truly made me happy.” April’s
24

FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

297

experience shows that our young ones can take a
courageous stand, proving themselves genuine citizens of God’s Kingdom.—Matt. 21:16.
Freedom to Raise Children
According to Jehovah’s Standards
25 Jehovah entrusts parents with the responsibility
to raise their children according to his standards.
(Deut. 6:6-8; Eph. 6:4) That assignment is challenging, but it may become far more so in the event of
a divorce. Views on parenting may di?er sharply.
For example, a Witness parent feels strongly that a
child should be raised according to Christian standards, whereas a non-Witness parent may disagree.
Of course, the Witness parent should respectfully
recognize that while divorce may sever the marital
relationship, the parental relationship remains intact.
26

The non-Witness parent may petition a court for

custody of the child or children so that he or she can
control their religious upbringing. Some allege that
being raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses is harmful.
They may contend that the children will be deprived
25, 26. What situation sometimes arises in the wake of a divorce?
298

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

of birthday celebrations, holiday festivities and, in the
event of a medical emergency, a “lifesaving” blood
transfusion. Thankfully, most courts consider what is
in the best interests of the child instead of judging
whether they consider the religion of one parent to be
harmful. Let us look at some examples.
27

United States. In 1992, the Supreme Court of

Ohio considered a case in which the non-Witness father claimed that it would be harmful to his young
son if he was raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The lower court had agreed, granting custody to the
father. The mother, Jennifer Pater, was granted visitation rights, but she was directed not to “teach or
expose the child to the Jehovah[’]s Witnesses’ beliefs
in any form.” This order from the lower court was
so broad that it could be interpreted to mean that
Sister Pater could not even talk with her son, Bobby, about the Bible or its moral standards! Can you
imagine her feelings? Jennifer was devastated, but
she says that she learned to be patient and to wait
on Jehovah to act. She recalls, “Jehovah was always
27, 28. How did the Supreme Court of Ohio respond to the charge
that being raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses is harmful to a child?
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

299

right there.” Her attorney, aided by Jehovah’s organization, appealed to the Supreme Court of Ohio.
28

The court disagreed with the decision of the

lower court, stating that “parents have a fundamental right to educate their children, including the
right to communicate their moral and religious values.” The court stated that unless it could be shown
that the religious values endorsed by Jehovah’s Witnesses would harm the physical and mental wellbeing of the child, the court had no right to restrict
a parent’s custody rights on the basis of religion. The
court found no proof that the Witnesses’ religious
beliefs would adversely a?ect the mental or physical
health of the child.
29

Denmark. Anita Hansen found herself facing a

similar challenge when her former husband petitioned a court to gain custody of seven-year-old
Amanda. Although the district court granted custody to Sister Hansen in 2000, Amanda’s father appealed to the high court, which overturned the district court’s ruling and granted him custody. The
29-31. Why did a sister in Denmark lose custody of her daughter, and
what did Denmark’s Supreme Court decide in the matter?
300

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

high court reasoned that because the parents had
con?icting views of life based on their religious beliefs, the father would be in a better position to address those con?icts. Essentially, then, Sister Hansen
lost custody of Amanda because of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses!
Throughout this di?cult ordeal, Sister Hansen
was at times so distraught that she did not know
what to pray for. “But,” she relates, “the thoughts in
Romans 8:26 and 27 were of great comfort. I always
felt that Jehovah understood what I meant. He had
his eye on me and was always there for me.”—Read
Psalm 32:8; Isaiah 41:10.
30

Sister Hansen appealed to the Supreme Court of
Denmark. In its ruling, the Court stated: “The question about custody shall be decided on a concrete assessment of what will be in the best interests of the
child.” Further, the Court held that a decision about
custody should rest on the way each parent handles
con?icts, not on the basis of the “doctrines and positions” of Jehovah’s Witnesses. To Sister Hansen’s
great relief, the Court recognized her ?tness as a
parent and returned the custody of Amanda to her.
31

FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

301

Various countries in Europe. In some cases, legal controversies regarding custody of children have
gone beyond the highest national courts. The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has considered this issue as well. In two cases, the ECHR acknowledged that lower, national courts had treated
Witness and non-Witness parents di?erently simply
on the basis of religion. Calling such treatment discriminatory, the ECHR has ruled that “a distinction
based essentially on a di?erence in religion alone is
not acceptable.” One Witness mother who bene?ted
from such a decision of the ECHR expressed relief
and said, “It hurt so much to be accused of harming
my children, when all I was trying to do was give
them what I thought was best for them—a Christian
upbringing.”
32

Of course, Witness parents facing legal challenges to their right to instill Bible standards in their
children’s hearts strive to show a spirit of reasonableness. (Read Philippians 4:5.) Just as they appreciate having the right to train their children in God’s
33

32. How has the European Court of Human Rights protected Witness
parents against discrimination?
33. How might Witness parents apply the principle of Philippians 4:5?
302

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

way, so they acknowledge that the non-Witness parent, if he or she chooses, shares the parental responsibilities. How seriously does a Witness parent take
the responsibility to train a child?
34

An example from Nehemiah’s day is instructive.

The Jews worked hard to repair and rebuild the walls
of Jerusalem. They knew that doing so would protect them and their families from the enemy nations
surrounding them. For that reason, Nehemiah urged
them: “Fight for your brothers, your sons and daughters, your wives and homes.” (Neh. 4:14) For those
Jews, the ?ght was worth every e?ort. Likewise today, parents who are Jehovah’s Witnesses work hard
to raise their children in the way of the truth. They
know that their children are bombarded by unwholesome in?uences at school and in the neighborhood.
Such in?uences may even creep into the home environment through the media. Parents, never forget
that it is worth every e?ort to ?ght for your sons and
daughters so as to provide a secure environment in
which they will ?ourish spiritually.
34. How can Christian parents today bene?t from the example of the
Jews in Nehemiah’s day?
FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

303

B e Con?dent in Jehovah’s Support of True Worship
35 Jehovah has surely blessed the e?orts of his
modern-day organization in the ?ght for the right
to worship freely. In pressing such legal issues,
God’s people have often been able to give a powerful witness in court and to the public at large.
(Rom. 1:8) A side bene?t of their many legal victories is that they have reinforced the civil rights of
many non-Witnesses. However, as God’s people, we
are not social reformers; nor are we interested in
self-vindication. Above all, Jehovah’s Witnesses have
pursued their legal rights in the courts in an e?ort
to establish and advance pure worship.—Read Philippians 1:7.
May we never take for granted the lessons of
faith we can learn from those who have fought for
the freedom to worship Jehovah! Let us remain faithful as well, con?dent that Jehovah is supporting our
work and continues to give us the strength to do his
will.—Isa. 54:17.
36

35, 36. What bene?ts have come to Jehovah’s Witnesses as a result
of our ?ghting for our legal rights, and what is your determination?

304

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How have some governments tried to limit
basic Christian freedoms, and with what
result?
? In what ways have Jehovah’s Witnesses fought
for the right to reject blood transfusions, and
how has God blessed their e?orts?
? What have opposers sometimes tried to do
regarding the children of Witness parents in
the wake of divorce?
? What leads you to believe that God’s
Kingdom is behind our record of legal
victories?

FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM TO WORSHIP

305

SECTION 5

K INGD OM E DUCATION
Training Servants of the King
YOU smile encouragingly at the speaker on the platform.
He is a young brother from your congregation, and he is giving his ?rst part on an assembly program. As you enjoy his
talk, you cannot help but marvel at the training God’s people receive. You remember this young man’s ?rst e?orts on
the platform—and look how far he has come! He made signi?cant progress after attending the Pioneer Service School.
Most recently, he and his wife enjoyed attending the School
for Kingdom Evangelizers. While applauding the brother’s
excellent talk, you look around and think of the instruction
that all of God’s people receive.
The Bible foretold a time when God’s people would all be
“taught by Jehovah.” (Isa. 54:13) We are living during that
time. We receive education not only through our publications but also through our meetings, assemblies, conventions, and the various schools designed to prepare us for
particular assignments in Jehovah’s organization. In this
section, we will consider how all of this education provides
solid proof that God’s Kingdom is ruling today.

16

Meeting Together for Worship

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Tracing the development and importance of our meetings

SHORTLY after Jesus’ resurrection, the disciples
gathered to encourage one another. However, they
locked the doors out of fear of their enemies. How
their fear must have dissipated when Jesus appeared
in their midst and said: “Receive holy spirit”! (Read
John 20:19-22.) Later, the disciples again gathered together, and Jehovah poured out holy spirit upon
them. What strength they received for the preaching
work that lay ahead!—Acts 2:1-7.
2

We face challenges similar to those of our ?rst-

century brothers. (1 Pet. 5:9) At times, some of us
may su?er from fear of man. And we need the
strength that Jehovah gives if we are to endure in
the preaching work. (Eph. 6:10) Jehovah provides
1. When the disciples gathered together, what help did they receive,
and why did they need it?
2. (a) How does Jehovah give us strength, and why do we need it?
(b) Why is the Family Worship arrangement so important? (See the
footnote and the box “Family Worship,” pages 317-318.)
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

307

much of that strength through our meetings. We currently have the opportunity to attend two instructive
weekly meetings—the Public Meeting and Watchtower Study and our midweek meeting called Our
Christian Life and Ministry.1[1] We also enjoy four
annual events—a regional convention, two circuit assemblies, and the Memorial of Christ’s death. Why
is it vital that we attend all those meetings? How did
our modern-day meetings develop? And what does
our attitude toward meetings reveal about us?
3

Why Meet Together?
Jehovah has long required that his people

meet together to worship him. For example, in
1513 B.C.E., Jehovah gave his Law to the nation of
Israel, and that Law included a weekly Sabbath so
that each family could worship him and be instructed in the Law. (Deut. 5:12; 6:4-9) When the Israelites
followed that command, families were strengthened
and the nation as a whole remained spiritually clean
1[1] In addition to our weekly congregation meetings, each family or each individual is encouraged to put aside time for personal
study or family worship.

3, 4. What does Jehovah require of his people? Give examples.
308

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

and strong. When the nation failed to apply the Law,
neglecting such requirements as meeting regularly for worship of Jehovah, they lost God’s favor.
—Lev. 10:11; 26:31-35; 2 Chron. 36:20, 21.
4

Consider, too, the example Jesus set. He had the

custom of going to the synagogue each week on the
Sabbath. (Luke 4:16) After Jesus’ death and resurrection, his disciples continued the custom of meeting
together regularly even though they were no longer
under the Sabbath law. (Acts 1:6, 12-14; 2:1-4; Rom.
14:5; Col. 2:13, 14) At those meetings, ?rst-century
Christians not only received instruction and encouragement but also o?ered sacri?ces of praise to God
by means of their prayers, comments, and songs.
—Col. 3:16; Heb. 13:15.
5

Likewise, when we attend our weekly meetings

and annual assemblies and conventions, we show our
support for God’s Kingdom, receive strength from
holy spirit, and encourage others by our expressions
of faith. More important, we have the opportunity
5. Why do we attend weekly meetings and annual assemblies and conventions? (See also the box “Annual Gatherings That Unite God’s
People,” pages 320-322.)
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

309

to worship Jehovah by means of our prayers, comments, and songs. The structure of our meetings may
be di?erent from that of those attended by the Israelites and the ?rst-century Christians, but our gatherings are equally important. How did our modernday meetings develop?

6

Weekly Meetings That Encourage
“Love and Fine Works”
When Brother Charles Taze Russell began

searching for the truth from God’s Word, he saw the
need to meet with others who had the same goal. In
1879, Russell wrote: “I, in company with others in
Pittsburgh, organized and maintained a bible class
for the searching of the Scriptures, meeting every
Sunday.” Readers of Zion’s Watch Tower were encouraged to meet together, and by 1881, meetings were
being held in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, every Sunday
and Wednesday. The November 1895 issue of the
Watch Tower said that the purpose of those meetings
was to cultivate “Christian fellowship, love and communion” and to give the opportunity to those at6, 7. (a) What is the purpose of our meetings? (b) How did meetings
vary from one group to another?
310

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

tending to encourage one another.—Read Hebrews 10:
24, 25.
7

For many years, the structure and frequency of

the meetings varied from one group of Bible Students to another. For example, a letter from a group
in the United States that was published in 1911 said:
“We hold at least ?ve meetings each week.” They
held those meetings on Monday, Wednesday, Friday,
and twice on Sunday. Another letter, from a group
in Africa, that was published in 1914 said: “We hold
meetings twice a month, beginning on Friday and
lasting over Sunday.” In time, however, the current
format of our meetings emerged. Consider brie?y the
history of each meeting.
8

Public Meeting. In 1880, the year after Broth-

er Russell began publishing Zion’s Watch Tower, he
followed the example set by Jesus and embarked on
a preaching tour. (Luke 4:43) In the process, Brother Russell set a pattern for what has become our current Public Meeting. Announcing the trip, the Watch
Tower said that Russell “would be glad to address
8. What were some themes of early public lectures?
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

311

public meetings on ‘Things pertaining to the kingdom
of God.’ ” In 1911, after classes, or congregations, had
been set up in a number of countries, each class was
encouraged to send out suitable speakers to surrounding areas to give a series of six lectures on topics such as judgment and the ransom. At the end of
each talk, the name of the speaker and the theme of
the talk for the following week were announced.
In 1945, The Watchtower announced the beginning of a global Public Meeting campaign involving
a series of eight Bible lectures that dealt with “urgent problems of the times.” For many decades, assigned speakers not only used the topics supplied
by the faithful slave but also delivered talks that
they had developed themselves. In 1981, however, all
speakers were directed to base their talks on the outlines supplied to the congregations.1[2] Until 1990,
some outlines for public discourses called for audience participation or demonstrations; but in that
year the instructions were amended, and public dis9

1[2] By 2013, more than 180 outlines for public talks were available.

9. How has the Public Meeting changed over the years, and how can
you support this meeting?
312

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

courses were from then on delivered only as talks. A
further adjustment came in January 2008 when public talks were reduced from 45 minutes to 30 minutes. Even though changes to the format have been
made, well-prepared public talks continue to build
faith in God’s Word and to educate us about various
aspects of the Kingdom of God. (1 Tim. 4:13, 16) Do
you enthusiastically invite those on whom you make
return visits and other non-Witnesses to hear those
important Bible-based discourses?
10

Watchtower Study. In 1922, brothers known as pil-

grims—ministers sent by the Watch Tower Society to
give talks to the congregations and take the lead in
the preaching work—recommended that a regular
meeting be devoted to a study of The Watch Tower.
This suggestion was adopted, and at ?rst, Watch Tower studies were held either midweek or on Sunday.
11

The June 15, 1932, Watchtower provided further

direction on how this meeting should be conducted.
Using as a model the study that was conducted in
the Bethel Home, the article stated that a brother
10-12. (a) What changes has the format of the Watchtower Study
undergone? (b) What questions would you do well to ask?
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

313

should lead the meeting. Three brothers could sit at
the front of the meeting place and take turns reading the paragraphs. Articles at that time did not include printed questions, so the conductor was told
to ask the audience to raise questions on the material under consideration. After that, he would call on
people in the audience to give answers to those questions. If further clari?cation was needed, the conductor was directed to o?er a “brief and succinct” explanation.
Initially, each congregation was permitted to select the issue of the magazine that the majority
wanted to study. However, the April 15, 1933, Watchtower suggested that all congregations use the current issue. In 1937, direction was given that the study
should be held on Sunday. Further re?nements that
restructured the meeting into the form we know today were published in the October 1, 1942, Watchtower. First, the magazine announced that questions
would appear at the bottom of each page of the
study articles and that those questions should be
used. Then, it stated that the meeting should be one
hour long. It also encouraged those who answered to
12

314

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

express themselves “in their own words” instead of
reading portions of the paragraph. The Watchtower
Study continues to be the primary meeting through
which the faithful slave provides spiritual food at the
proper time. (Matt. 24:45) Each of us does well to
ask: ‘Do I prepare for the study of The Watchtower
each week? And do I endeavor to comment if I am
able?’
13

Congregation Bible Study. In the mid-1890’s, after

a number of volumes of Millennial Dawn had been
released, Brother H. N. Rahn, a Bible Student living
in the city of Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A., suggested holding “Dawn Circles” for Bible study. At ?rst,
these meetings, which were often held in private
homes, were an experiment. By September 1895,
however, Dawn Circles were being conducted with
success in a score of cities in the United States. The
Watch Tower of that month therefore suggested that
all students of the truth hold those meetings. It directed that the one conducting should be a good
reader. He was to read a sentence and then wait for
13, 14. What is the history of the Congregation Bible Study, and what
do you enjoy about this meeting?
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

315

those present to comment. After reading each of the
sentences in a paragraph and discussing them, he
was to look up and read the cited scriptures. At the
end of a chapter, each one in attendance was to
give a brief review of the material.
The name of this meeting changed several times.
It became known as Berean Circles for Bible Study,
a reference to the ?rst-century Beroeans who carefully examined the Scriptures. (Acts 17:11) In time,
the name was changed to Congregation Book Study.
Now it is called Congregation Bible Study, and the
entire congregation meets together at the Kingdom
Hall rather than in groups in private homes. Over
the decades, various books, brochures, and even
Watch Tower articles have been used as a basis for
study. From the early days, all who attended were encouraged to take part in the meeting. This meeting
has done much to deepen our knowledge of the Bible. Do you regularly prepare for this meeting and
participate in it to the best of your ability?
14

Theocratic Ministry School. “On Monday night,
February 16, 1942,” recalled Carey Barber, who at
15

15. What was the Theocratic Ministry School designed to do?
316

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

FAMILY WORSHIP
AS THE last days have progressed, Jehovah’s organization has increasingly focused attention on the need
for each family to have its own Bible study program.
(2 Tim. 3:1) For example, the booklet Home and Happiness, published in 1932, forthrightly said: “Let each
family begin at once a study of the Bible at home.” And
the May 15, 1956, Watchtower urged all Christian families to have “a regular Bible study right in the home for
the bene?t of the entire family.” Then it asked: “Does
your family study The Watchtower together some evening before the meeting?”
In 2009, the organization emphasized the importance
of family study by adjusting the schedule of midweek
meetings; from that time forward, the Congregation Bible Study was to be held on the same night as the Theocratic Ministry School and the Service Meeting. “One
reason for this adjustment,” stated the January 2011 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, “was to give families an
opportunity to fortify their spirituality by scheduling a
speci?c evening each week for family worship.” It then
said: “Use this time for unhurried Bible discussion and
study tailored to the needs of the family.”1[1]
1[1] Some suggestions for material that could be used during
family worship can be found in the January 2011 issue of Our
Kingdom Ministry.
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

317

Why is the Family Worship arrangement so important—something that should not be missed? Because
it a?ects the spiritual strength not only of the family
but also of the congregation. To illustrate: The congregation could be likened to a house made of bricks.
(Read Hebrews 3:4-6.)1[2] The strength of a well-designed
brick house is determined by two key components
—the quality of its foundation and the durability of
the individual bricks. If the foundation is ?awed, the
house will fall. But even a house with a solid foundation will become structurally unsound if the bricks
crumble. The Christian congregation is built on the
strongest foundation, the teachings of Christ. (Read
1 Corinthians 3:10-15.)2[3] Individuals and families in a
congregation are like the bricks. Family Worship sessions provide a unique opportunity for each individual and each family to build and maintain strong,
?re-resistant faith. And strong individuals and strong
families result in strong congregations. Is prearranged
family worship part of your weekly schedule?
1[2] Paul’s words are directed to those who have “the heavenly calling.” (Heb. 3:1) But in principle his counsel applies to all
Christians.
2[3] For a more detailed discussion of this Bible passage, see
the July 15, 1999, issue of The Watchtower, pages 12-14, paragraphs 15-20. Why not read this material and meditate on how
it applies to your Family Worship sessions?
318

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

that time was serving at the world headquarters in
Brooklyn, New York, “all the male members of the
Brooklyn Bethel family were invited to enroll in
what would later be known as the Theocratic Ministry School.” Brother Barber, who much later became
a member of the Governing Body, described the
school as “one of the most outstanding developments
of Jehovah’s dealing with his people in modern
times.” The course was such a success in helping
brothers improve their teaching and preaching skills
that beginning in 1943, the booklet Course in Theocratic Ministry was gradually made available to congregations worldwide. The June 1, 1943, Watchtower
said that the Theocratic Ministry School was designed to help God’s people “train themselves to be
better witnesses in the proclamation of the Kingdom.”—2 Tim. 2:15.
16

At ?rst, many found it agonizing to talk in

front of a large audience. Clayton Woodworth, Jr.,
whose father had been unjustly imprisoned with
Brother Rutherford and others in 1918, recalled how
16, 17. Did the Theocratic Ministry School teach only technical
skills? Explain.
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

319

ANNUAL GATHERINGS THAT UNITE
G OD’S PEOPLE
JEHOVAH instructed all Israelite males to gather at Jerusalem three times a year. (Ex. 23:14-17; Lev. 23:34-36) Jesus’
adoptive father, Joseph, took his whole family to Jerusalem
on such occasions. Other Israelite men likely did the same.
God’s people today likewise gather three times each year for
assemblies and conventions. Some of the conventions have
marked outstanding milestones in the development of the
earthly part of God’s organization during the last days. Consider just some of these conventions and what made them
memorable.

1919: Cedar Point, Ohio, U.S.A.
This was the ?rst major convention after World War I.
The preaching work was revitalized.
Production of the magazine The Golden Age (now called
Awake!) was announced.
1922: Cedar Point, Ohio
Impetus was given to the preaching work in the talk
on the subject “The Kingdom.” This talk introduced the
rousing cry “Advertise, advertise, advertise, the King and
his Kingdom”!
1931: Columbus, Ohio
We adopted the name Jehovah’s Witnesses.
1935: Washington, D.C.
For the ?rst time, we understood that the “great
320

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

multitude,” mentioned at Revelation 7:9 in the King James
Version, will live forever on earth.
1942: New World Theocratic Assembly, held in 85 cities
worldwide
The discourse “Peace—Can it Last?” provided insight
into the prophecy recorded in Revelation chapter 17,
showing that after the end of World War II, there would
be an opportunity to gather many more subjects of God’s
Kingdom.
1950: Theocracy’s Increase Assembly
The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures
was released.
1958: Divine Will International Assembly
This was the largest international convention held in
one city; more than 250,000 delegates from 123 lands
assembled in New York.
1961: United Worshipers Assembly
The complete New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures
was released in one volume.
1992: “Light B earers” Convention
This was the ?rst international convention of Jehovah’s
Witnesses held in the former Soviet Union, in
St. Petersburg, Russia.
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

321

1993: “Divine Teaching” Convention, Kyiv, Ukraine
This was the largest Christian baptism on record at a
single convention—7,402 new ministers were baptized.
2011: “Let God’s Kingdom Come!” Convention
Our understanding of the prophetic image mentioned in
Daniel chapter 2 was re?ned. We now understood that
the feet of iron mixed with clay represent the AngloAmerican World Power, the one that will still be dominant when God’s Kingdom crushes the entire symbolic
image.
2014: “Keep S eeking First God’s Kingdom!” Convention
Marking the 100th anniversary of Christ’s Kingdom in
heaven.

he felt when he ?rst joined the school in 1943. “It
was very di?cult for me to give talks,” said Brother Woodworth. “My tongue seemed to grow long, my
mouth went completely dry, and my voice became
something between a roar and a squeak.” As Clayton’s abilities improved, however, he received many
public speaking privileges. The school taught him
much more than just technical skills. It taught him
the value of humility and the importance of relying
on Jehovah. “I came to realize,” he said, “that the
322

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

speaker himself is not important. But if he prepares
well and rests all his con?dence in Jehovah, he will
be heard with pleasure and the hearers will learn
something.”
In 1959, sisters were invited to enroll in the
school. Sister Edna Bauer recalls hearing the announcement at the assembly she attended. “I remember the excitement it caused among the sisters,”
she said. “Now their opportunities were expanded.”
Over the years, many brothers and sisters seized the
opportunity to enroll in the Theocratic Ministry
School and be taught by Jehovah. Today, we continue to receive such training at our midweek meeting.
—Read Isaiah 54:13.
17

S ervice Meeting. As early as 1919, meetings
were held to organize ?eld service. At the time,
not all in the congregation attended those meetings—only those who were directly engaged in distributing literature. For much of the year 1923, a
Service Meeting was held once a month, and all
in the class, or congregation, were to attend. By
18

18, 19. (a) How do we now receive practical guidance for carrying
out the ministry? (b) Why do we sing at our meetings? (See the box
“The Singing of the Truth.”)
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

323

“THE SINGING OF THE TRUTH”
JEHOVAH’S people love to express their devotion to him
by singing about him and to him. For example, when Jehovah delivered the Israelites from the Egyptians at the
Red Sea, the people expressed their gratitude and admiration in a stirring song. (Ex. 15:1-21) Later, singing became
an integral part of the worship of Jehovah at the temple.
(1 Chron. 23:4, 5; 25:7) In the ?rst century, Jesus and his
disciples expressed their feelings for Jehovah in songs of
praise.—Matt. 26:30; Eph. 5:19.
Likewise, during the time since Brother Russell and his
associates began rediscovering the truth, we have used numerous collections of songs in our worship of Jehovah.
Explaining the important role that singing plays, the February 15, 1896, issue of the Watch Tower said: “The singing
of the truth is a good way to get it into the heads and
hearts of God’s people.”

1928, congregations were urged to hold the Service
Meeting each week, and in 1935, The Watchtower encouraged all congregations to base the Service Meeting on information published in the Director (later
called Informant and still later, Our Kingdom Ministry). This meeting soon became a regular feature of
each congregation’s schedule.
324

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Today we receive practical guidance for carrying out the ministry at our midweek meeting. (Matt.
19

10:5-13) If you qualify to receive a personal copy of
the meeting workbook, do you study it and apply the
suggestions it contains as you engage in the ministry?
The Most Important Meeting of the Year
20 Jesus told his followers to commemorate his
death until his arrival. Like the Passover celebration,
the Memorial of Christ’s death is an annual event.
(1 Cor. 11:23-26) This meeting draws millions each
year. It reminds the anointed of the privilege they
have of being joint heirs of the Kingdom. (Rom. 8:
17) And in the other sheep, it engenders deep respect
for and loyalty to the King of God’s Kingdom.
—John 10:16.
21

Brother Russell and his associates recognized

the importance of commemorating the Lord’s Evening Meal and knew that it should be observed only
once each year. The April 1880 issue of the Watch
Tower said: “It has for several years been the custom
20-22. (a) Why do we commemorate Jesus’ death? (b) What bene?t
do you gain from attending the Memorial each year?
MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

325

of many of us here in Pittsburgh to . . . remember
the Passover [Memorial] and eat the emblems of our
Lord’s body and blood.” Conventions were soon being held in conjunction with the Memorial. The ?rst
time records were kept for such an occasion was in
1889, when 225 attended and 22 were baptized.
Today, we no longer observe the Memorial as
part of a convention program, but we do invite all in
whatever community we live in to join us at a local
Kingdom Hall or rented facility. In 2013, over 19 million commemorated Jesus’ death. What a privilege
we have not only to attend the Memorial but also to
encourage others to join us on this most sacred
night! Do you enthusiastically invite as many as possible to the Memorial each year?
22

What Our Attitude Reveals
23 Loyal servants of Jehovah do not view the instruction to meet together as a burden. (Heb. 10:24,
25; 1 John 5:3) King David, for example, loved going
to Jehovah’s house for worship. (Ps. 27:4) He especially enjoyed doing so in the company of others who
loved God. (Ps. 35:18) And think of Jesus’ example.
23. How do you view our meeting together?
326

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Even while young, he felt a deep desire to be in his
Father’s house of worship.—Luke 2:41-49.
When we attend meetings, we show our love for
Jehovah and our desire to build up our fellow believers. We also express our longing to learn how to live
as subjects of God’s Kingdom, for it is primarily at
our meetings, assemblies, and conventions that we
receive such training. In addition, our meetings provide us with the skill and strength we need to endure
in one of the most important activities being carried
out by God’s Kingdom today—the making and training of disciples of the King Jesus Christ. (Read Matthew 28:19, 20.) Without a doubt, the depth of our
desire to meet together reveals just how real God’s
Kingdom is to us as individuals. May we always value our meetings!
24

24. When we attend meetings, what opportunities do we have?

MEETING TOGETHER FOR WORSHIP

327

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? Why do we meet together?
? How do you feel about the various meetings?
? What does your attitude toward meetings
reveal? Explain.

328

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

17

Training Ministers
of the Kingdom

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

How theocratic schools prepare Kingdom ministers to ful?ll
their assignments

FOR two years, Jesus preached throughout Galilee. (Read Matthew 9:35-38.) He visited many cities and villages, teaching in the synagogues and
preaching the good news of the Kingdom. Wherever
he preached, crowds ?ocked to him. “The harvest
is great,” Jesus observed, and more workers were
needed.
2

Jesus arranged to expand the preaching work.

How? By sending his 12 apostles “out to preach the
Kingdom of God.” (Luke 9:1, 2) The apostles may
have had questions about how to carry out this
work. Before dispatching them, Jesus lovingly gave
them something that his heavenly Father had given
him—training.
1-3. How did Jesus expand the preaching work, giving rise to what
questions?
TRAINING MINISTERS OF THE KINGDOM

329

3

A number of questions now come to mind: What

training did Jesus receive from his Father? What
training did Jesus give his apostles? And what about
today—has the Messianic King trained his followers to carry out their ministry? If so, how?
4

“Just as the Father Taught Me, I Speak”
Jesus readily acknowledged that he was taught by

his Father. During his ministry, Jesus said: “Just as
the Father taught me, I speak these things.” (John 8:
28) When and where was Jesus taught? His training evidently began soon after he—God’s ?rstborn
Son—was created. (Col. 1:15) Alongside his Father in
the heavens, the Son spent countless ages listening to
and observing the “Grand Instructor.” (Isa. 30:20) As
a result, the Son received a matchless education in the
qualities, works, and purposes of his Father.
5

In due time, Jehovah taught his Son about the

ministry that he would carry out on earth. Consider
a prophecy that describes the relationship between
the Grand Instructor and his ?rstborn Son. (Read Isa4. When and where was Jesus taught by his Father?
5. What instruction did the Father give the Son about the ministry that
he would carry out on earth?
330

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

iah 50:4, 5.) Jehovah awakened his Son “morning by
morning,” says the prophecy. That word picture conveys the idea of a teacher who wakes his pupil up early in the morning in order to teach him. One Bible
reference work states: “Jehovah . . . takes him as it
were into the school after the manner of a pupil, and
teaches him what and how he is to preach.” In that
heavenly “school,” Jehovah taught his Son “what to
say and what to speak.” (John 12:49) The Father also
gave his Son instruction on how to teach.1[1] While on
earth, Jesus put his training to good use not only by
carrying out his ministry but also by training his followers to ful?ll their ministry.
What training did Jesus give his apostles, as mentioned at the outset? According to Matthew chapter 10, he gave them speci?c ministerial instruction,
including the following: where to preach (verses 5, 6),
6

1[1] How do we know that the Father taught the Son how to teach?
Consider this: Jesus’ abundant use of illustrations in his teaching
ful?lled a prophecy that was recorded centuries before his birth.
(Ps. 78:2; Matt. 13:34, 35) Clearly, the Author of that prophecy, Jehovah, determined well in advance that his Son would teach by
means of illustrations, or parables.—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.

6, 7. (a) What training did Jesus give his apostles, and what did it
equip them to do? (b) Jesus has made sure that his followers in our day
have received what type of training?
TRAINING MINISTERS OF THE KINGDOM

331

what message to share (verse 7), the need to put their
trust in Jehovah (verses 9, 10), how to approach
householders (verses 11-13), how to handle rejection
(verses 14, 15), and how to respond when persecuted
(verses 16-23).1[2] The clear training that Jesus gave his
apostles equipped them to spearhead the work of
preaching the good news in the ?rst century C.E.
What about our day? Jesus, the King of God’s
Kingdom, has given his followers the weightiest of assignments, namely, to preach “this good news of the
Kingdom . . . in all the inhabited earth for a witness
to all the nations.” (Matt. 24:14) Has the King trained
us to carry out this all-important work? Indeed, he
has! From heaven, the King has made sure that his
followers have received training on how to preach outside the congregation and how to ful?ll special responsibilities within it.
7

8

Training Ministers to B e Evangelizers
Jehovah’s organization has long used assemblies,

1[2] Months later, Jesus “designated 70 others and sent them out
by twos” to preach. He also gave them training.—Luke 10:1-16.

8, 9. (a) What was the main purpose of the Theocratic Ministry
School? (b) How has the midweek meeting helped you to be more effective in your ministry?
332

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

conventions, and congregation meetings—such as
the Service Meeting—to train God’s people for the
ministry. Starting in the 1940’s, however, the brothers taking the lead at headquarters began to arrange
for training by means of various schools.
9

Theocratic Ministry School. As we saw in the pre-

ceding chapter, this school began to be conducted in
1943. Was the objective of this school just to train
students to give e?ective talks at congregation meetings? No. The main purpose of the school was
to train God’s people to use their gift of speech
to praise Jehovah in the ministry. (Ps. 150:6) The
school equipped all the brothers and sisters who
were enrolled to be more e?ective Kingdom ministers. Now such training is provided by means of the
midweek meeting.
10

Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. What is now

called the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead began
on Monday, February 1, 1943. The school was originally designed to train pioneers and other full-time
servants for missionary service somewhere in the
10, 11. Who may now be enrolled in Gilead School, and what is the
objective of its curriculum?
TRAINING MINISTERS OF THE KINGDOM

333

world ?eld. But since October 2011, enrollment is
limited to those who are already in some form of
special full-time service—special pioneers, traveling
overseers and their wives, Bethelites, and ?eld missionaries who have not yet attended the school.
What is the objective of the Gilead School
curriculum? One longtime instructor answers: “To
strengthen the faith of the students by means of a
thorough study of God’s Word and to help them to
develop the spiritual qualities needed to meet successfully the challenges of their assignments. Also, a
fundamental objective of the curriculum is to instill
in the students a more intense desire to share in the
evangelizing work.”—Eph. 4:11.
11

What e?ect has Gilead School had on the worldwide preaching work? Since 1943, over 8,500 individuals have been trained at the school,1[3] and Gileadtrained missionaries have served in over 170 lands
worldwide. The missionaries put their training to
good use, setting a zealous example in the ministry
12

1[3] Some enrollees have gone through Gilead School more than
once.

12, 13. What e?ect has Gilead School had on the worldwide preaching work? Give an example.
334

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

and training others to do the same. In many cases,
the missionaries spearheaded the work in areas that
had few if any Kingdom publishers.
Consider what happened in Japan, where organized public preaching all but stopped during World
War II. By August 1949, there were fewer than ten
13

local publishers in Japan. By the end of that year,
however, 13 Gilead-trained missionaries were busy
preaching in Japan. Many more missionaries followed. At ?rst, the missionaries concentrated their
e?orts on larger cities; later, they moved on to other cities. The missionaries heartily encouraged their
students and others to join the pioneer ministry. The
zealous e?orts of the missionaries bore rich results.
Now, there are over 216,000 Kingdom proclaimers in
Japan, and nearly 40 percent of them serve as pioneers!1[4]
14

Other theocratic schools. The Pioneer Service

School, the Bible School for Christian Couples, and
1[4] For more details about the impact that Gilead-trained missionaries have had on the world ?eld, see chapter 23 of the book
Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom.

14. Theocratic schools are powerful proof of what? (See also the box
“Schools That Train Kingdom Ministers,” pages 341-347.)
TRAINING MINISTERS OF THE KINGDOM

335

the Bible School for Single Brothers have helped
those enrolled to develop spiritually and to take a
zealous lead in the evangelizing work.1[5] All these
theocratic schools are powerful proof that our King
has fully equipped his followers to accomplish their
ministry.—2 Tim. 4:5.
Training Brothers to Handle Special Responsibilities
15 Recall Isaiah’s prophecy that speaks of Jesus as
being instructed by God. In that heavenly “school,”
the Son learned “how to answer the tired one with
the right word.” (Isa. 50:4) Jesus applied that instruction; while on earth, he refreshed those who were
“toiling and loaded down.” (Matt. 11:28-30) In imitation of Jesus, men who serve in positions of responsibility want to be a source of refreshment to their
brothers and sisters. To that end, various schools
have been established to help quali?ed brothers to
be more e?ective in serving their fellow believers.
16 Kingdom Ministry School. The ?rst class of this
1[5] The latter two schools have been replaced by the School for
Kingdom Evangelizers.

15. Men in positions of responsibility want to imitate Jesus in what
way?
16, 17. What is the objective of the Kingdom Ministry School? (See
also the footnote.)
336

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

school began on March 9, 1959, at South Lansing,
New York. Traveling overseers as well as congregation servants were invited to attend a month-long
course. Later the course was translated from English
into other languages, and the school gradually began
training brothers worldwide.1[6]
Regarding the objective of the Kingdom Ministry School, the 1962 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses
stated: “In this very busy world an overseer in the
congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses must be a man
who can organize his life so as to give the proper attention to all in the congregation and be a blessing
to them. At the same time he cannot be a man who
ignores his own family in favor of the congregation,
but he must use the spirit of a sound mind. What a
wonderful opportunity has been a?orded the congregation servants throughout the world of coming together at the Kingdom Ministry School to get a
training that will help them to do just what the Bible says an overseer should be able to accomplish!”
—1 Tim. 3:1-7; Titus 1:5-9.
17

1[6] Now all elders bene?t from Kingdom Ministry School sessions that are of varying lengths and are held every few years. Since
1984, ministerial servants have also received training at this school.
TRAINING MINISTERS OF THE KINGDOM

337

18

All of God’s people have bene?ted from the

Kingdom Ministry School. How so? When elders and
ministerial servants apply what they have learned at
the school, they, like Jesus, are a source of refreshment to their fellow believers. Do you not appreciate
a kind word, a listening ear, or an encouraging visit
from a caring elder or ministerial servant? (1 Thess.
5:11) Such quali?ed men are a real blessing to their
congregations!
19

Other theocratic schools. The Teaching Committee

of the Governing Body supervises other schools that
provide training for brothers in positions of responsibility within the organization. Those schools
are designed to help responsible brothers—congregation elders, traveling overseers, and Branch Committee members—to become more e?ective in ful?lling
their many responsibilities. The Bible-based courses
encourage the brothers to maintain their own spirituality and to apply Scriptural principles in their
18. How do all of God’s people bene?t from the Kingdom Ministry
School?
19. What other schools does the Teaching Committee supervise, and
what are those schools designed to do?
338

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

dealings with the precious sheep that Jehovah has
entrusted to their care.—1 Pet. 5:1-3.
Clearly, the Messianic King has made sure that
his followers are well-trained. All of the training has
come from the top down: Jehovah trained his Son,
and the Son has trained his followers. Hence, Jesus
could say that we are all “taught by Jehovah.” (John
6:45; Isa. 54:13) Let us be determined to take full advantage of the training that our King has made available to us. And let us remember that the main purpose of all this training is to help us keep spiritually
strong so that we may fully accomplish our ministry.
20

20. Why could Jesus say that all of us are “taught by Jehovah,” and
what are you determined to do?

TRAINING MINISTERS OF THE KINGDOM

339

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What training did Jesus receive from his
Father?
? How has the King trained his followers to be
evangelizers?
? How have quali?ed brothers been trained to
ful?ll their responsibilities?
? How can you show that you appreciate the
training that the King has provided?

340

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

S CHO OLS THAT TRAIN
KINGD OM MINISTERS
OUR CHRISTIAN LIFE AND MINISTRY
Purpose: To train publishers to be e?ective preachers and teachers of the good news.
Duration: Continuous.
Location: Local Kingdom Hall.
Enrollment: All may be enrolled who are actively associating with
the congregation, who agree with the teachings of the Bible, and
whose lives are in harmony with Christian principles. To join,
speak to the Life and Ministry Meeting overseer.
Bene?ts: The midweek meeting teaches us to research and present
information logically. We also learn to listen to others and focus
on their spiritual needs, not just our own.
Arnie, a longtime traveling overseer, comments: “I grew up a stutterer and had trouble making eye contact with others. This [meeting]
has helped me to gain con?dence. With Jehovah’s help, through this
training I have learned breathing and concentration techniques. I am
very grateful for the ability to praise God in the congregation and in
my ministry.”

S CHO OL FOR CONGREGATION ELDERS1[1]
Purpose: To help elders deepen their spirituality and care for their
responsibilities in the congregation.
1[1] This school is not yet operating in every country.
341

Duration: Five days.
Location: Decided by the branch o?ce; usually a nearby Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Enrollment: The branch o?ce invites elders.
Bene?ts: Note some comments from brothers in the 92nd class of
this school at Patterson, New York, U.S.A.:
“The school has bene?ted me greatly, helping me to look at myself
and see how I can take care of Jehovah’s sheep.”
“I will carry this training with me for the rest of my life.”

PIONEER SERVICE S CHO OL
Purpose: To help pioneers “fully accomplish” their ministry.
—2 Tim. 4:5.
Duration: Six days.
Location: Decided by the branch o?ce; usually a nearby
Kingdom Hall.
Enrollment: Those who have been a regular pioneer for at least
one year are enrolled automatically and noti?ed of the school by
their circuit overseer. Some longtime pioneers who have not
attended in the past ?ve years may be invited to attend again.
Bene?ts: “The school has helped me to deal with challenges in the
ministry and in my life,” says Lily. “The way I study, the way I teach,
and the way I use the Bible have improved greatly. I am better
prepared to help others, support the elders, and contribute to the
growth of the congregation.”
342

Brenda, who has attended the school twice, notes: “The school
allowed me to be more absorbed in spiritual things, strengthen my
conscience, and focus on helping others. Clearly, Jehovah is generous!”

BETHEL ENTRANTS’ S CHO OL
Purpose: This school is designed to help new arrivals to make a
success of their Bethel service.
Duration: Four days for four hours each day.
Location: Bethel.
Enrollment: Permanent members of the Bethel family and longterm temporary volunteers (a year or longer) are enrolled
automatically.
Bene?ts: Demetrius, who attended this school in the 1980’s, says:
“This course improved my study habits and helped prepare me for a
long Bethel career. The instructors, curriculum, and practical counsel
convinced me of Jehovah’s loving concern and of his desire for me to
succeed in my Bethel service.”

S CHO OL FOR KINGD OM EVANGELIZERS1[1]
Purpose: To give those who are in full-time service (married couples, single brothers, and single sisters) specialized training so
that they can be used more fully by Jehovah and his organization.
Many graduates will be assigned to serve where there is a greater
need in their home country. Graduates under 50 might serve as
temporary special pioneers to open up and expand the work in
isolated areas.
Duration: Two months.
343

Location: Decided by the branch o?ce; usually at a Kingdom
Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Enrollment: Those between 23 and 65 years of age who are in
full-time service, who are in good health, who have the circumstances to serve wherever there is a greater need, and who have
the attitude “Here I am! Send me!” may be enrolled. (Isa. 6:8) All
who attend the school, single brothers and sisters as well as married couples, must have been in the full-time service for at least
two years without interruption. Couples must have been married
for at least two years. Brothers must have served as either an elder or a ministerial servant for at least two consecutive years. If
this school is available in your branch territory, a meeting will be
held at the regional convention to provide information for those
interested in enrolling.
Bene?ts: Many positive comments have been received from those
who have attended the Bible School for Single Brothers and the
Bible School for Christian Couples. In 2013, the Governing Body
approved combining those two schools into one called the School
for Kingdom Evangelizers. Now the bene?ts of the course will be
experienced by many more faithful pioneers, including single sisters.

WATCHTOWER BIBLE S CHO OL OF GILEAD
Purpose: Graduates may be assigned as traveling overseers, as
?eld missionaries, or as Bethelites. By putting their training to
good use, graduates help to strengthen and stabilize the ?eld and
branch organization.
Duration: Five months.
344

Location: Watchtower Educational Center, Patterson, New York.
Enrollment: Married couples, single brothers, and single sisters,
who are already serving in some form of special full-time service.
Field missionaries who were not previously graduates of Gilead,
as well as special pioneers, Bethelites, or traveling overseers and
their wives, may be invited by their Branch Committee to apply.
Applicants must speak and write English.
Bene?ts: Lade and Monique, a married couple from the United
States who have been in their assignment for several years, o?er
the following comments:
“Gilead school prepared us to go anywhere in the world, roll up our
sleeves, and work with our dear brothers,” says Lade.
Monique adds: “As I apply what I’ve learned from God’s Word, I ?nd
great joy in my assignment. I see that joy as proof of Jehovah’s love.”

KINGD OM MINISTRY S CHO OL
Purpose: To train traveling overseers, elders, and ministerial
servants to care for their oversight and organizational
responsibilities. (Acts 20:28) Current situations, trends, and
immediate needs of the congregations are covered. This school is
held every few years, as decided by the Governing Body.
Duration: In recent years this school has been conducted for
varying lengths of time.
Location: Usually a nearby Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Enrollment: The circuit overseer noti?es elders and ministerial
servants. The branch o?ce invites traveling overseers.
345

Bene?ts: “The school, though compact and precise, invigorates elders
to maintain joy and carry on in a manly way in Jehovah’s service. Both
new and longtime elders learn to shepherd e?ectively and be united in
the same line of thought.”—Quinn.
“This training was balanced—building our spiritual appreciation,
warning us of dangers, and providing us with practical suggestions to
care for the ?ock.”—Michael.

S CHO OL FOR CIRCUIT OVERSEERS AND
THEIR WIVES1[1]
Purpose: To help circuit overseers serve congregations more
e?ectively, “work hard in speaking and teaching,” and shepherd
those in their charge.—1 Tim. 5:17; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3.
Duration: One month.
Location: Determined by the branch o?ce.
Enrollment: The branch o?ce invites circuit overseers and their
wives.
Bene?ts: “Our appreciation for Jesus’ headship over the organization
was enhanced. We saw the need to encourage the brothers we serve
and to fortify the unity of each congregation. The course further
impressed on our minds that while the traveling overseer o?ers advice
and even correction on occasion, his main goal is to help the brothers
to see that Jehovah loves them.”—Joel and Connie, ?rst class, 1999.

S CHO OL FOR BRANCH COMMITTEE
MEMBERS AND THEIR WIVES
Purpose: To help Branch Committee members care better for
the work of supervising Bethel homes, give attention to service
346

matters a?ecting congregations, and oversee circuits in their
respective territories.—Luke 12:48b.

Duration: Two months.
Location: Watchtower Educational Center, Patterson, New York.
Enrollment: The Service Committee of the Governing Body
invites members of Branch or Country Committees and their
wives.
Bene?ts: Lowell and Cara were part of the 25th class. They now
serve in Nigeria.
“I was reminded that no matter how busy I am or what work I have
been given, the key to pleasing Jehovah is spirituality,” says Lowell.
Cara recalls a lesson she took away from the school: “If I cannot
state a point simply, I need to study the subject better before trying to
teach it to others.”

347

SECTION 6

K INGD OM S UPP ORT
Building for Worship and Providing Relief
YOU walk into your Kingdom Hall and hardly recognize
the place. You have always been proud of this building. You
may even have happy memories of helping in its construction some years ago. But in a way you are even prouder
now, for the Kingdom Hall has been transformed temporarily into a relief center. After a recent storm brought
?oods and devastation to your region, the Branch Committee quickly organized a way for the victims of the disaster
to get food, clothing, clean water, and other help. Donated
relief supplies are neatly arranged. Brothers and sisters
are ?ling in, getting what they need and, in many cases,
wiping tears of joy from their eyes.
Jesus said that the outstanding mark of his people would
be their love for one another. (John 13:34, 35) In this section, we will consider how Christian love is being shown in
the building projects and the relief e?orts undertaken by
Jehovah’s Witnesses. All such love is powerful evidence
that we live under Jesus’ Kingdom rule.

18

How Kingdom Activities
Are Financed

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Why and how Jehovah’s people support Kingdom
work ?nancially

ON ONE occasion, Brother Charles T. Russell was
approached by a minister of the Reformed Church
who wanted to know how the activities of the Bible
Students were managed.
“We never take up a collection,” explained Brother Russell.
“How do you get the money?” asked the minister.
“If I tell you what is the simplest truth you will
hardly be able to believe it,” replied Russell. “When
people get interested in this way, they ?nd no basket placed under their nose. But they see there are
expenses. They say to themselves, ‘This hall costs
something . . . How can I get a little money into this
thing?’ ”
1, 2. (a) How did Brother Russell answer a minister who wanted to
know how the activities of the Bible Students were managed? (b) What
will we consider in this chapter?
HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

349

The minister looked at Brother Russell in disbelief.
“I am telling you the plain truth,” continued Russell. “They do ask me this very question, ‘How can I
get a little money into this cause?’ When one gets a
blessing and has any means, he wants to use it for
the Lord. If he has no means, why should we prod
him for it?”1[1]
Brother Russell was indeed telling “the plain
truth.” God’s people have a long history of making
voluntary contributions to support true worship. In
this chapter, we will examine some Scriptural examples of this along with our modern-day history.
As we consider how Kingdom activities are being
?nanced today, each of us would do well to ask,
‘How can I show my support for the Kingdom?’
2

“Let Everyone With a Willing Heart
Bring a Contribution”
3 Jehovah has con?dence in his true worshippers.
He knows that if they are given the opportunity, they
1[1] The Watch Tower, July 15, 1915, pages 218-219.

3, 4. (a) What con?dence does Jehovah have in his worshippers?
(b) How did the Israelites show their support for the building of the
tabernacle?
350

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

will gladly show their devotion by their voluntary
giving. Consider two examples from Israel’s history.
4

After leading the Israelites out of Egypt, Jeho-

vah told them to build a portable tent, or tabernacle,
for worship. The structure and its furnishings would
require considerable resources. Jehovah instructed
Moses to give the people the opportunity to support
the project, saying: “Let everyone with a willing
heart bring a contribution for Jehovah.” (Ex. 35:5)
How did the people, who not long before had toiled
“in harsh conditions in every form of slavery,” respond? (Ex. 1:14) They showed unquali?ed support,
willingly parting with gold, silver, and other valuables—most of which they had likely obtained from
their former masters, the Egyptians. (Ex. 12:35, 36)
The Israelites gave more than was needed and had to
be “restrained from bringing in anything else.”—Ex.
36:4-7.
5

Some 475 years later, David contributed out of

his “private treasure” to ?nance the building of the
5. How did the Israelites respond when David gave them the opportunity to contribute to the building of the temple?
HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

351

temple, the ?rst permanent center of true worship
on earth. Then he gave his fellow Israelites the opportunity to give, asking: “Who volunteers to come
forward today with a gift in hand for Jehovah?” In
response, the people made “voluntary o?erings to Jehovah with a complete heart.” (1 Chron. 29:3-9) Recognizing the true source of the contributions, David
said in prayer to Jehovah: “Everything is from you,
and we have given to you what comes from your own
hand.”—1 Chron. 29:14.
6

Neither Moses nor David had to pressure God’s

people to give. Rather, the people gave with willing
hearts. What about today? We are well-aware that
the work God’s Kingdom is doing requires money. It
takes considerable resources to publish and distribute Bibles and Bible literature, to build and maintain meeting places and branch facilities, and to
provide emergency relief aid to fellow believers in
times of disaster. Therefore, important questions
arise: How are the necessary funds obtained? Do the
King’s followers need to be prodded to give?
6. Why is money needed to carry out Kingdom work today, and what
questions arise?
352

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“It Will Never B eg nor Petition Men for Support”
7 Brother Russell and his associates refused to
imitate the money-raising schemes so common in
the churches of Christendom. In the second issue
of the Watch Tower, under the heading “Do You
Want ‘Zion’s Watch Tower’?” Russell stated: “ ‘Zion’s
Watch Tower’ has, we believe, JEHOVAH for its
backer, and while this is the case it will never beg
nor petition men for support. When He who says: ‘All
the gold and silver of the mountains are mine,’ fails
to provide necessary funds, we will understand it to
be time to suspend the publication.” (Hag. 2:7-9)
Over 130 years later, The Watchtower and the organization that publishes it are still going strong!
Jehovah’s people do not beg for money. They do
not pass collection plates or send out letters of solicitation. Neither do they use bingo, bazaars, or
ra?es to raise money. They hold to what the Watch
Tower long ago said: “We have never considered it
proper to solicit money for the Lord’s cause, after
the common custom . . . It is our judgment that money raised by the various begging devices in the name
8

7, 8. Why do Jehovah’s people not beg or petition others for money?
HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

353

of our Lord is o?ensive, unacceptable to him, and
does not bring his blessing either upon the givers or
the work accomplished.”1[2]
“Let Each One Do Just as He
Has Resolved in His Heart”
9 As Kingdom subjects today, we do not need to
be coerced into giving. Quite the contrary, we gladly use our money and other resources to support
Kingdom activities. Why are we so willing to give?
Consider three reasons.
First, we make voluntary contributions because
we love Jehovah and want to do “what is pleasing in
his eyes.” (1 John 3:22) Jehovah is indeed pleased
with a worshipper who gives freely from his heart.
Let us examine the apostle Paul’s words about Christian giving. (Read 2 Corinthians 9:7.) A true Christian
is not a reluctant or forced giver. Rather, he gives
because he has “resolved in his heart” to do so.2[3]
That is, he gives after he has considered a need and
10

1[2] The Watch Tower, August 1, 1899, page 201.
2[3] One scholar says that the Greek term rendered “resolved”
“has the idea of predetermination.” He adds: “Though there is
spontaneous joy in giving, it is still to be planned and systematic.”
—1 Cor. 16:2.

9, 10. What is one reason why we make voluntary contributions?
354

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

how he can ?ll it. Such a giver is dear to Jehovah,
for “God loves a cheerful giver.” Another translation
reads: “God loves people who love to give.”
Second, we make material contributions as a
way of thanking Jehovah for our many blessings.
Consider a heart-searching principle in the Mosaic
Law. (Read Deuteronomy 16:16, 17.) When attending
the three annual festivals, each Israelite man was to
give a gift “in proportion to the blessing that Jehovah” had given him. Hence, before attending a festival, each man had to count his blessings and search
his heart, deciding on the best possible gift he could
bring. In a similar way, when we contemplate the
many ways that Jehovah has blessed us, we feel
moved to give him our best possible gift. Our wholehearted gift, which includes our material contributions, is a re?ection of how much we appreciate the
blessings Jehovah has showered upon us.—2 Cor. 8:
12-15.
11

Third, by our voluntary contributions, we show
our love for the King Jesus Christ. How so? Note
12

11. What moves us to give Jehovah our best possible gift?
12, 13. How do our voluntary contributions show our love for the King,
and how much does each one give?
HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

355

what Jesus told his disciples on the ?nal night of his
earthly life. (Read John 14:23.) “If anyone loves me,”
Jesus said, “he will observe my word.” Jesus’ “word”
includes his command to preach the Kingdom good
news in all the earth. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) We observe that “word” by doing all within our power—expending our time, energy, and material resources—to promote the Kingdom-preaching work.
We thereby show our love for the Messianic King.
13

Yes, as loyal Kingdom subjects, we want with all

our heart to show our support for the Kingdom by
making ?nancial contributions. How do we do so?
That is a personal decision. Each one gives to the
best of his ability. Many of our fellow believers, however, have few of this world’s goods. (Matt. 19:23, 24;
Jas. 2:5) But such ones can take comfort in knowing
that Jehovah and his Son value even small contributions made from a willing heart.—Mark 12:41-44.
14

How Is Money Received?
For many years, Jehovah’s Witnesses o?ered Bi-

ble literature on a contribution basis. The suggested
14. For many years, Jehovah’s Witnesses o?ered their literature on
what basis?
356

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

contribution was kept as low as possible so that people of even modest means could receive the literature. Of course, if a householder seemed interested
but could not a?ord to contribute, Kingdom publishers were more than willing to leave the literature.
Their heartfelt desire was to get the literature into
the hands of sincere people who could read it and
bene?t from it.
15

In 1990, the Governing Body began to adjust the

way we o?er our literature. Starting that year in the
United States, all literature began to be o?ered completely on a donation basis. A letter to all congregations in that land explained: “Magazines and literature will be provided to publishers and to the
interested public without asking or even suggesting
that a speci?c contribution be made as a precondition to receiving an item. . . . Any who wish to make
a donation to defray the expenses of our educational work may do so, but they may receive the literature whether or not a donation is made.” That
15, 16. (a) What adjustment in the way we o?er our literature was
started by the Governing B ody in 1990? (b) How are voluntary donations made? (See also the box “Where Do Our Donations Go?”)
HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

357

arrangement served to clarify the voluntary and religious nature of our work and to make clear that “we
are not peddlers of the word of God.” (2 Cor. 2:17)
In time, the voluntary donation arrangement was implemented in branches around the world.
16

How are voluntary donations made? In Kingdom

Halls of Jehovah’s Witnesses, there are discreetlyplaced contribution boxes. Individuals may use them
or send donations directly to one of the legal entities
used by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Each year an article in
The Watchtower outlines how such willing donations
can be made.
17

How Is the Money Used?
Worldwide work. Funds are used to cover the

expenses incurred in carrying out the worldwide
preaching work. These expenses include the cost
of producing literature for global distribution, constructing and maintaining branch o?ces and Bethel
homes, and operating various theocratic schools. In
addition, funds are used to care for missionaries,
17-19. Explain how donated funds are used for (a) the worldwide work,
(b) Kingdom Hall construction worldwide, and (c) local congregation
expenses.
358

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

traveling overseers, and special pioneers. Our donations are also used to provide emergency relief aid to
fellow believers in times of disaster.1[4]
Kingdom Hall construction worldwide. Funds are
used to help congregations to build or remodel a
Kingdom Hall. As contributions are received, still
more funds can be made available to assist other
congregations.2[5]
18

Local congregation expenses. Funds are used to
pay for the operation and upkeep of the Kingdom
Hall. The elders might recommend that some funds
be sent to the local branch o?ce for use in furthering the worldwide work. In such cases, the elders
would present a resolution to the congregation. If approved, the recommended funds would be sent. Each
month, the brother who cares for the congregation’s
accounts prepares a ?nancial report, which is read
to the congregation.
19

When we consider all that is involved in carrying out the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making
20

1[4] See Chapter 20 for more information about the ministry of
relief.
2[5] See Chapter 19 for details about Kingdom Hall construction.

20. How can you honor Jehovah with your “valuable things”?
HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

359

work earth wide, we are moved to “honor Jehovah
with [our] valuable things.” (Prov. 3:9, 10) Our valuable things include our physical, mental, and spiritual assets. We certainly want to use these to the full
in Kingdom work. Remember, though, that our valuable things also include our material assets. Let us
be resolved to give what we can, when we can. Our
voluntary donations bring honor to Jehovah and
show our support for the Messianic Kingdom.

360

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What can you learn from the example of those
who contributed for the construction of the
tabernacle and of the temple?
? Why do Kingdom subjects today gladly use
their money and other resources to support
Kingdom activities?
? How can you show your support for all that
the Kingdom is accomplishing today?

HOW KINGDOM ACTIVITIES ARE FINANCED

361

WHERE DO
OUR DONATIONS GO?
ALL D ONATIONS ARE USED EXCLUSIVELY TO
SUPP ORT KINGD OM INTERESTS

1
PUBLISHING
Publishing and distributing literature, printed and electronic

2
LO CAL CONGREGATION
Operating expenses, upkeep of the Kingdom Hall, and
congregation resolutions1[6]

3
KINGD OM HALL CONSTRUCTION
Between 1999 and 2013, over 24,500 Kingdom Halls were built in
lands with limited resources

4
DISASTER RELIEF
1[6] Wherever they gather for worship, Jehovah’s Witnesses have
arrangements in place for making contributions, but the speci?cs
may vary somewhat from one land to another.
362

5
SPECIAL FULL-TIME SERVANTS
Includes basic living expenses such as housing, food,
and health care
Traveling Overseers
Special Pioneers
Missionaries
International and Kingdom Hall Construction Personnel
Bethelites

6
BRANCHES AND TRANSLATION OFFICES
7
CONVENTIONS
8
THEO CRATIC S CHO OLS

WAYS TO D ONATE
CONTRIBUTION BOXES
DIRECT DONATIONS
(made by cash, check, or electronically, such as through jw.org)
ESTATES/NONCASH DONATIONS
TRUSTS AND ANNUITIES
363

19

Building Work That
Honors Jehovah

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Worldwide construction work serves Kingdom
interests

JEHOVAH’S loyal servants have long enjoyed constructing buildings that bring praise to his name. The
Israelites, for example, enthusiastically participated
in the building of the tabernacle and generously provided materials for it.—Ex. 35:30-35; 36:1, 4-7.
2

Jehovah does not view the building materials

themselves as the primary things that bring him honor, nor are they the things that he values most.
(Matt. 23:16, 17) What Jehovah treasures, the gift
that brings him honor above all else, is the worship
rendered him by his servants, including their willing
spirit and zealous work. (Ex. 35:21; Mark 12:41-44;
1 Tim. 6:17-19) That fact is signi?cant. Why? Because buildings come and go. For instance, the tab1, 2. (a) What have Jehovah’s servants long enjoyed doing? (b) What
does Jehovah treasure?
364

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ernacle and the temple no longer exist. Those structures may be gone, but Jehovah has not forgotten the
generosity and labor of his loyal servants who supported their construction.—Read 1 Corinthians 15:58;
Hebrews 6:10.
Jehovah’s modern-day servants have also worked
hard to construct places of worship. And what
we have accomplished under the direction of our
King Jesus Christ is truly remarkable! Clearly, Jehovah has blessed our e?orts. (Ps. 127:1) In this chapter, we will review just some of the work that has
been done and how it has brought honor to Jehovah.
We will also hear from some who have been involved
in accomplishing the work.
3

Building Kingdom Halls
4 As discussed in Chapter 16, Jehovah requires
that we meet for worship. (Heb. 10:25) Our meetings
not only strengthen our faith but also heighten our
enthusiasm for the preaching work. As the last days
progress, Jehovah continues to speed up that work.
3. What will we review in this chapter?
4. (a) Why do we need more places of worship? (b) Why have various
branch o?ces been consolidated? (See the box “Branch Construction
—Adjusting to Changing Needs.”)
BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

365

THE NEW LIGHT CHURCH
IN THE late 1880’s, many members of a Baptist congregation in the area of Mount Lookout, West Virginia, became
Bible Students. For a while they continued to share the
Baptist church with the Baptists. Apparently, whichever
group got to the building ?rst used it. By 1890, however,
our brothers had stopped meeting in the Baptist church
and had constructed their own hall.
This hall appears to be one of the ?rst places of worship
built by Jehovah’s modern-day people. It became known
as the New Light church because the truths that the Bible
Students taught were viewed as new light on the Scriptures. The hall was used until the 1920’s. Brother A. H.
Macmillan and other traveling speakers known as pilgrims gave talks at the hall, and it was used to show the
“Photo-Drama of Creation.”

In response, hundreds of thousands ?ock to his organization each year. (Isa. 60:22) With the greater
number of Kingdom subjects comes a greater need
for printing facilities to produce Bible-based literature. We also need more places of worship.
5

Early in the modern history of Jehovah’s people,

5. Why is the name Kingdom Hall appropriate? (See also the box “The
New Light Church.”)
366

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

the Bible Students began to see the need for their
own meeting places. It appears that one of the ?rst
places of worship constructed was in West Virginia,
U.S.A., in 1890. By the 1930’s, Jehovah’s people had
built or renovated a number of halls, but those meeting places had not yet been given a distinctive name.
In 1935, though, Brother Rutherford visited Hawaii,
where a hall was being constructed in conjunction
with a new branch o?ce. When asked what this
building should be called, Brother Rutherford replied: “Don’t you think we should call it ‘Kingdom
Hall,’ since that is what we are doing, preaching the
good news of the Kingdom?” (Matt. 24:14) That appropriate name would soon be given not only to that
particular hall but to most of the meeting places
used by congregations of Jehovah’s people worldwide.
6

By the 1970’s, the need for Kingdom Halls was

rapidly increasing. In response, brothers in the United States developed an e?cient method of building
attractive, functional structures in just a few days.
6, 7. What has the construction of quickly built Kingdom Halls provided?
BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

367

BRANCH CONSTRUCTION—ADJUSTING
TO CHANGING NEEDS
AS THE Kingdom-preaching work began to expand
worldwide, branch o?ces were set up in one country after another. The ?rst one was established in Britain in
1900; the second, in Germany in 1903; and the third, in
Australia in 1904. The demand for literature also grew
rapidly, requiring that printing facilities be constructed.
One of the ?rst was an eight-story structure in Brooklyn,
New York, that was built in 1927. By 2013, Bibles, books,
or magazines were being printed by 15 branches.
From the mid-1970’s to the early 1990’s, new branch facilities were built in some 60 lands. In a further 30 locations, branch o?ces were expanded. In recent years,
however, a number of branch o?ces have been consolidated. Explaining some of the reasons, the 2013 Yearbook
of Jehovah’s Witnesses said: “Improvements in communications and printing technology have reduced the number of personnel needed at larger branches. With fewer
people serving at larger branches, room became available to house some who were working in smaller branches in other countries. Now, from key locations, a pool of
experienced Witnesses [care] for the work of Bible education.”

368

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

By 1983, some 200 of such Kingdom Halls had
been erected in the United States and Canada. To
accomplish the work, brothers began forming regional building committees. This method worked so
well that in 1986, the Governing Body formalized
the arrangement, and by 1987, there were 60 Regional Building Committees (RBCs) in the United
States.1[1] By 1992, RBCs had also been appointed in
Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Japan, Mexico, South Africa, and Spain. To be sure, the hardworking brothers who build Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls deserve our support, for the work they
are doing is part of sacred service.
7

These quickly built Kingdom Halls provided a

wonderful witness to the communities in which they
were constructed. A newspaper in Spain, for example, carried the headline “Faith Moves Mountains.”
Commenting on the construction of such a Kingdom
Hall in the town of Martos, the paper asked: “How
1[1] In 2013, more than 230,000 volunteers were approved to work
with the 132 RBCs in the United States. In that country, annually
those committees coordinated the construction of about 75 new
Kingdom Halls and helped with the renovation or repair of about
900 halls.
BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

369

is it possible that in this present world based on selfishness, volunteers from various regions [of Spain]
unsel?shly travel to Martos in order to erect a building that has broken all records for speed, perfection,
and organization?” The article answered the question by quoting the words of one of the Witness volunteers: “The merit simply lies in the fact that we
are a people taught by Jehovah.”
8

Building in Lands With Limited Resources
As the 20th century drew to a close, people

streamed into Jehovah’s organization in lands where
the brothers have limited resources. The local congregations did what they could to build meeting
places. But in some countries, they had to endure
ridicule and prejudice because the local Kingdom
Halls were very primitive when compared with other places of worship. Starting in 1999, however, the
Governing Body approved a program to accelerate
the construction of Kingdom Halls in developing
lands. Funds from more prosperous lands were made
available so that an “equalizing” could take place.
8. In 1999, what new program did the Governing B ody approve, and
why?
370

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

(Read 2 Corinthians 8:13-15.) And brothers and sisters
from other lands volunteered to help with the work.
At ?rst, the task seemed overwhelming. A report
in 2001 revealed that more than 18,300 Kingdom
Halls were needed in 88 developing countries. With
the backing of God’s spirit and our King Jesus
Christ, though, no task is impossible. (Matt. 19:26)
Within about 15 years, from 1999 to 2013, God’s people had built 26,849 Kingdom Halls as part of this
program.1[2] Jehovah continues to bless the preaching work, so that as of 2013, there was still a need
for some 6,500 Kingdom Halls in those countries,
and currently, hundreds more are needed each year.
9

How has the construction of those new Kingdom Halls brought honor to Jehovah’s name? A
report from the branch o?ce in Zimbabwe said:
“Within one month of building a new Kingdom
Hall, attendance at the meetings usually doubles.” In
many countries, it seems that people are reluctant
10

1[2] This ?gure does not include the numerous Kingdom Halls
that were built in lands outside the program.

9. What task seemed overwhelming, but what was accomplished?
10-12. How has the construction of Kingdom Halls brought honor to
Jehovah’s name?
BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

371

to associate with us until a suitable place of worship
is available. Once a Kingdom Hall is built, though,
it soon ?lls up and another is required. However, it
is more than just the appearance of the structures
that draws people to Jehovah. The genuine Christian
love displayed by those building the halls also a?ects
the way people view his organization. Consider a few
examples.
11

Indonesia. When a man who had been watching

the construction of a Kingdom Hall found out that
all the workers were volunteers, he said: “You people are simply amazing! I have seen how each one of
you works wholeheartedly and with joy, even though
you receive no payment. I think that there is no other religious organization like yours!”
12

Ukraine. A woman who had passed by a King-

dom Hall construction project each day concluded
that the workers were Jehovah’s Witnesses and that
the building was to be a Kingdom Hall. She said: “I
had heard about Jehovah’s Witnesses from my sister
who became one. Observing this building work, I decided that I also wanted to be in this spiritual fami372

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ly. Here I have seen love displayed.” This woman accepted a Bible study and was baptized in 2010.
Argentina. A married couple approached the
brother overseeing a Kingdom Hall construction site.
The husband said, “We have been following your
building activities very closely, and . . . we have decided that we want to learn about God in this place.”
He then asked, “What must we do to qualify to attend meetings here?” The couple accepted the o?er
of a Bible study, but on the condition that the whole
family could take part. The brothers happily agreed
to this condition.
13

You may not have had the privilege of helping
to construct the Kingdom Hall in which you meet,
but you can still do much to help your local place
of worship bring honor to Jehovah’s name. For example, you can enthusiastically invite your Bible students, return visits, and other members of the public to attend meetings with you at the Kingdom Hall.
You also have the opportunity to help clean and
14

13, 14. (a) What have you learned from the way one married couple
reacted after observing activities at a Kingdom Hall construction site?
(b) What can you do to ensure that your place of worship brings honor to Jehovah’s name?
BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

373

maintain your place of worship. With good planning,
you may be able to donate toward the care of the
Kingdom Hall you attend or donate toward the
building of these places of worship in other parts of
the world. (Read 1 Corinthians 16:2.) All these activities add to the praise of Jehovah’s name.
15

Workers Who “O?er Themselves Willingly”
Much of the work that goes into building King-

dom Halls, Assembly Halls, and branch facilities is
done by local brothers and sisters. Often, though,
they are assisted by brothers and sisters from other countries who have experience in construction.
Some of those volunteers have organized their affairs so that they can work on an international project for a number of weeks. Others have made themselves available to serve for many years, moving
from one construction assignment to the next.
16

International construction work presents unique

challenges but also o?ers satisfying rewards. Timo
and Lina, for instance, have traveled to countries in
15-17. (a) Who carry out much of the building work? (b) What have
you learned from the comments made by the couples who have worked
on international construction projects?
374

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Asia, Europe, and South America to work on building Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, and branch of?ces. Says Timo, “I have had a change of assignment
on average every two years for the past 30 years.”
Lina, who married Timo 25 years ago, says: “I’ve
served with Timo in ten di?erent countries. It takes
a considerable amount of energy and time to adapt
to new food, a new climate, a new language, and a
new preaching territory and to make new friends.”1[3]
Has the e?ort been worthwhile? “The challenges,”
says Lina, “have resulted in our greatest blessings.
We have experienced Christian love and hospitality
and have felt Jehovah’s loving care for us. We have
also seen the ful?llment of the promise Jesus gave to
his disciples, which is recorded at Mark 10:29, 30. We
have received a hundred times more in terms of spiritual brothers, sisters, and mothers.” Timo says, “It
brings us deep satisfaction to use our skills for the
noblest of all purposes, participating in the expansion of the King’s belongings.”
1[3] International servants and volunteers spend the majority of
their time working on the building site, but they also support the
local congregations in the preaching work on the weekend or in the
evening.
BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

375

Darren and Sarah, who have helped on construction projects in Africa, Asia, Central America,
Europe, South America, and the South Paci?c, feel
that they have received more than they have given.
Despite the challenges they have faced, Darren says:
“It has been a privilege to work with brothers from
various parts of the globe. I have seen that the love
we share for Jehovah is like a thread that circles the
globe, joining us all together.” Sarah says: “I have
learned so much from brothers and sisters with different cultures! Seeing the sacri?ces they make to
serve Jehovah motivates me to continue giving my
best.”
17

King David prophesied that even though subjects of God’s Kingdom would face challenges, they
would “o?er themselves willingly” to serve Kingdom
interests. (Read Psalm 110:1-3.) All who are involved
in work that supports the Kingdom are having a
share in ful?lling those prophetic words. (1 Cor. 3:9)
The scores of branch o?ce buildings, hundreds of
Assembly Halls, and tens of thousands of Kingdom
Halls around the world provide tangible proof that
18

18. How is the prophecy recorded at Psalm 110:1-3 being ful?lled?
376

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

God’s Kingdom is real and is now ruling. What a
privilege we have to serve the King Jesus Christ in
a work that brings Jehovah the honor he so richly
deserves!

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? Why do we build meeting places and branch
facilities?
? How does our building work bring honor to
Jehovah?
? What can you do to support the building and
maintenance of places of worship?

BUILDING WORK THAT HONORS JEHOVAH

377

20

The Ministry of Relief

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

Christian love in action during times of disaster

IT IS about 46 C.E., and Judea is in the grip of famine. The Jewish disciples of Christ living there lack
the means to pay the sky-high prices demanded for
the meager supply of grain available. They are hungry, staring starvation in the face. However, they are
about to experience the protection of Jehovah’s hand
in a way that no other disciples of Christ have ever
felt it before. What is about to happen?
2 Moved by the su?ering of the Jewish Christians
in Jerusalem and Judea, Jewish and Gentile Christians in Antioch, Syria, collect funds for their fellow
believers. Then they select two responsible brothers
in their midst, Barnabas and Saul, to deliver the relief aid to the congregation elders in Jerusalem. (Read
Acts 11:27-30; 12:25.) Imagine how touched the needy
brothers in Judea must have been by this act of love
on the part of their brothers in Antioch!
1, 2. (a) What hardship did Christians in Judea face? (b) What act
of love did the Judean Christians experience?
378

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

That event, back in the ?rst century C.E., is the
?rst recorded instance of Christians living in one
part of the world sending relief aid to Christians living in another part. Today, we follow the pattern set
by our brothers in Antioch. When we learn that fellow believers in another area experience a disaster
or a trial, we come to their aid.1[1] To appreciate how
our relief e?orts relate to our other ministerial activities, let us consider three questions about the ministry of relief: Why do we view relief work as a ministry? What are the objectives of our relief work?
How do we bene?t from the ministry of relief?
3

Why Relief Work Is “S acred S ervice”
4 In his second letter to the Corinthians, Paul explained that Christians have a twofold ministry. Although Paul’s letter was directed to anointed Christians, today his words apply to Christ’s “other sheep”
1[1] This chapter considers relief e?orts performed in behalf of
fellow believers. However, in many instances, our relief work also
bene?ts non-Witnesses.—Gal. 6:10.

3. (a) How do God’s people in modern times still follow the pattern
set by early Christians in Antioch? Give an example. (See also the box
“Our First Large-Scale Relief E?ort in Modern Times.”) (b) What
questions will we consider in this chapter?
4. What did Paul tell the Corinthians about the Christian ministry?
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

379

as well. (John 10:16) One part of our ministry is “the
ministry of the reconciliation,” that is, our preaching
and teaching work. (2 Cor. 5:18-20; 1 Tim. 2:3-6) The
other part involves a ministry that we perform in behalf of fellow believers. Speci?cally, Paul referred to
a “relief ministry.” (2 Cor. 8:4) As to the expressions
“ministry of the reconciliation” and “relief ministry,”
in both instances the word “ministry” is a translation of a form of the Greek word di·a·ko·nia. Why is
that signi?cant?
5 By using the same Greek word for both activities, Paul grouped relief work with other forms of
ministry that were carried out in the Christian congregation. He had stated earlier: “There are di?erent
ministries, and yet there is the same Lord; and there
are di?erent activities, . . . But [they] are performed
by the very same spirit.” (1 Cor. 12:4-6, 11) In fact,
Paul linked the various congregational ministries
with “sacred service.”1[2] (Rom. 12:1, 6-8) No wonder
he felt that it was appropriate to give part of his time
“to minister to the holy ones”!—Rom. 15:25, 26.
1[2] Paul used the plural form of di·ako·nos (minister) to describe
“ministerial servants.”—1 Tim.3:12.

5. Why is it signi?cant that Paul called relief work a ministry?
380

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Paul helped the Corinthians to see why relief
work was part of their ministry and worship to Jehovah. Note his reasoning: Christians who provide
relief do so because they are “submissive to the good
news about the Christ.” (2 Cor. 9:13) Hence, moved
by their desire to put Christ’s teachings into practice, Christians help fellow believers. The kind acts
that they perform in behalf of their brothers, stated
Paul, are nothing less than expressions of “the surpassing undeserved kindness of God.” (2 Cor. 9:14;
1 Pet. 4:10) Thus, in commenting on serving our
brothers in need, which includes relief work, The
Watchtower of December 1, 1975, rightly stated: “We
should never doubt that Jehovah God and his Son
Jesus Christ give real importance to this kind of service.” Yes, relief work is a valuable form of sacred
service.—Rom. 12:1, 7; 2 Cor. 8:7; Heb. 13:16.
6

Relief Work With Clear Objectives
7 What are the objectives of our relief ministry?
Paul addressed that question in his second letter to
6. (a) As Paul explained, why is relief work part of our worship?
(b) Describe how our relief work is carried out globally today. (See
the box “When Disaster Strikes!” page 388.)
7, 8. What is the ?rst objective of our relief ministry? Explain.
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

381

OUR FIRST LARGE-S CALE RELIEF
EFFORT IN MODERN TIMES
IN September 1945, just a few months after World War II
ended in Europe, Brother Knorr announced the start of a
large-scale campaign to send “material aid to the needy
brethren of central Europe.”
Within weeks after that announcement, Witnesses in
Canada, the United States, and other lands began sorting
and packing clothing and collecting food. From January 1946 onward, goods were sent to fellow believers in
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, China, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, England, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, and Romania.
This aid program was not a onetime e?ort. Relief shipments continued for two and a half years! During that
time some 85,000 brothers and sisters sent more than 700,000 pounds of food, over 1,000,000 pounds of clothing,
and more than 124,000 pairs of shoes to their brothers and
sisters in war-ravaged lands. By August 1948, this huge relief e?ort was concluded. “This has certainly been an expression of love one toward another,” noted The Watchtower in 1949. “We know all the brethren did this as an
honor to the Lord, having in mind that this material assistance would help some to carry on their true worship; and
so they esteemed it a great privilege to be able to serve
382

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

their brethren in this manner.” This relief e?ort brought
praise to Jehovah, provided relief to fellow believers, and
strengthened the bond of unity among the brothers worldwide.

the Corinthians. (Read 2 Corinthians 9:11-15.) In these
verses, Paul highlights three main objectives, or
goals, that we attain by sharing in “the ministry of
this public service,” that is, relief work. Let us consider them one at a time.
8

First, our relief ministry brings glory to Jehovah.
Note how often in the ?ve verses cited above Paul
directs his brothers’ attention to Jehovah God. The
apostle reminds them of “an expression of thanks
to God” and of “many expressions of thanks to
God.” (Verses 11, 12) He mentions how relief e?orts
cause Christians to “glorify God” and to praise
“the surpassing undeserved kindness of God.” (Verses 13, 14) And Paul concludes his consideration
about the relief ministry by declaring: “Thanks be to
God.”—Verse 15; 1 Pet. 4:11.
9

Like Paul, God’s servants today view relief

9. What change in thinking may relief work cause? Give an example.
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

383

e?orts as opportunities to bring glory to Jehovah
and to adorn his teachings. (1 Cor. 10:31; Titus 2:10)
In fact, relief work often plays a considerable part in
removing negative notions that some people have
about Jehovah and his Witnesses. To illustrate: A
woman living in an area struck by a hurricane had a
sign on her door that read: “Jehovah’s Witnesses
—Do Not Call.” Then one day she saw relief workers restoring a damaged house across the street from
her home. For days, she observed the friendly workers, and then she went over to ?nd out who they
were. On learning that the volunteers were Jehovah’s
Witnesses, she was impressed and said, “I have misjudged you people.” The result? She took down the
sign on her door.
10

Second, we “provide well for the needs” of fellow believers. (2 Cor. 9:12a) We are eager to meet the immediate needs and to help alleviate the su?ering of
our brothers and sisters. Why? Because the members
of the Christian congregation form “one body,” and
“if one member su?ers, all the other members su?er
10, 11. (a) What examples show that we are reaching the second objective of our relief work? (b) What publication helps relief workers?
(See the box “An Added Tool for Relief Workers.”)
384

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

with it.” (1 Cor. 12:20, 26) Hence, brotherly a?ection
and compassion move numerous brothers and sisters
today to drop what they are doing at a moment’s notice, gather their tools, and head for disaster-stricken
areas to bring relief to fellow believers. (Jas. 2:15, 16)
For instance, after a tsunami struck Japan in 2011,
the United States branch o?ce sent a letter to Regional Building Committees in the United States,
asking if “a few quali?ed brothers” would be available to help with rebuilding Kingdom Halls there.
What was the response? Within weeks, nearly 600
volunteers applied to help—and agreed to ?y to Japan at their own expense! “We have been overwhelmed with the response,” noted the United States
branch o?ce. When a brother in Japan asked a relief
worker from abroad why he had come to help, he was
told: “Our brothers in Japan are part of ‘our body.’
We feel their pain and su?ering.” Moved by selfsacri?cing love, relief workers have at times even
risked their lives to help fellow believers.1[3]—1 John
3:16.
1[3] See the article “Aiding Our Family of Believers in Bosnia,” in
the November 1, 1994, issue of The Watchtower, pages 23-27.
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

385

11

Non-Witnesses also express appreciation for our

relief work. For instance, after a disaster struck the
state of Arkansas, U.S.A., in 2013, a newspaper reported on the rapid response of Witness volunteers,
stating: “The organizational structure of the Jehovah’s Witnesses has developed the disaster response
volunteer service to a ?ne art.” Indeed, as the apostle Paul noted, we “provide well” for our brothers in
need.
12

Third, we help a?icted ones get back into their spir-

itual routine. Why is this important? Paul states that
those receiving relief aid will be moved to make
“many expressions of thanks to God.” (2 Cor. 9:12b)
What better way could there be for a?icted ones to
express their thanks to Jehovah than by getting back
to their spiritual routine as quickly as possible?
(Phil. 1:10) The Watchtower stated in 1945: “Paul approved . . . the collecting of the contributions because it was helping . . . needy Christian brethren to
enjoy some material relief and to thus be able to
12-14. (a) Why is reaching the third objective of our relief work so
important? (b) What expressions highlight the importance of continuing with spiritual activities?
386

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

engage more freely and energetically in Jehovah’s
witness-work.” Our objective is the same today. By
getting back in the preaching work, our brothers
strengthen not only their distressed neighbors but
also themselves.—Read 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
Consider some comments from those who were
recipients of much-needed relief aid, resumed sharing in the ministry, and were strengthened by doing
so. “It was a blessing for our family to go in ?eld
service,” noted a brother. “It gave us a brief respite
from anxiety over our own a?airs as we tried to comfort others.” A sister said: “Focusing on spiritual activity took my mind o? the destruction around me.
It gave me a sense of security.” Another sister observed: “While many things were beyond our control,
the ministry provided direction for my family. Talking with others about our hope of the new world
strengthened our con?dence that all things will be
made new.”
13

Attending meetings is another spiritual activity
that our a?icted fellow believers need to resume as
quickly as possible. Consider what happened to Kiyoko, a sister then in her late 50’s. After she lost
14

THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

387

PREPARATION FOR A DISASTER
The Governing Body has directed that all branches worldwide give
guidelines to congregation elders and traveling overseers as to how
to prepare for and deal with disasters. For example, even before a
disaster occurs, the elders need to make sure that they have
up-to-date contact information for each congregation member.

WHEN DISASTER STRIKES!
1
Local elders contact all publishers

2
Elders report to the coordinator of the body of elders

3
Coordinators report to traveling overseers and other responsible
brothers who are in contact with the branch o?ce

4
Food, water, shelter, medical care, and emotional and spiritual
support are provided as soon as possible

5
Branch o?ce sends a report about the situation and the needs to
the Coordinators’ Committee of the Governing Body

6
Disaster Relief Committee organizes relief e?orts and helps the
brothers and sisters with their long-term recovery

7
Coordinators’ Committee assesses the needs and, if needed,
approves that volunteers from other countries extend help
388

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

AN ADDED TO OL FOR RELIEF WORKERS
IN June 2013, the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses and Disaster Relief became available. It was especially prepared for
government o?cials in the United States who oversee
emergency management e?orts. The brochure describes
some of the relief e?orts that we have carried out since the
mid-1940’s. It also features a map that illustrates the global scale of our relief work. “Brothers serving on Disaster
Relief Committees use this brochure to establish contacts
with key o?cials in disaster-prone areas well before disasters strike,” explains an elder who is involved in organizing relief e?orts. “When such o?cials are already familiar
with our relief activities, it becomes easier for us to obtain
from them the permissions needed to enter areas where
disasters have occurred.”

everything in a tsunami except the clothes and sandals she was wearing, she was at a loss as to how she
would survive. Then an elder told her that they
would have their regular Christian meeting in his
car. Says Kiyoko: “An elder and his wife and another sister and I sat in the car. The meeting was simple but, like a miracle, the memory of the tsunami
just slipped away from me. I felt peace of mind.
That meeting showed me the power of Christian
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

389

association.” Commenting on the meetings she attended after a disaster occurred, another sister stated: “They were my lifeline!”—Rom. 1:11, 12; 12:12.
15

The Ministry of Relief Brings Lasting B ene?ts
In his consideration of the ministry of relief,

Paul also explained to the Corinthians the bene?ts
that they and other Christians would receive from
sharing in this work. He stated: “With supplication for
you, they [the Jewish Christians in Jerusalem who received the assistance] express a?ection for you because of the surpassing undeserved kindness of God
upon you.” (2 Cor. 9:14) Yes, the generosity of the
Corinthians would move the Jewish Christians to
pray in behalf of their brothers in Corinth, including
Gentiles, and would deepen their a?ection for them.
16

Applying Paul’s words about the bene?ts of re-

lief work to our day, The Watchtower of December 1,
1945, stated: “When one section of God’s consecrated people contributes to the needs of another group
of them, think of the unifying e?ect it has!” That is
15, 16. (a) What bene?t would Christians in Corinth and elsewhere
receive from supporting relief e?orts? (b) How do we similarly bene?t
from relief work today?
390

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

IT SHAPED THE COURSE OF HIS LIFE
WHAT impact may taking part in relief work have on
young ones? Consider what happened to Peter Johnson,
who did so for the ?rst time at age 18. He recalls: “Seeing
the gratefulness of the brothers and feeling the joy that
comes from giving touched me deeply. It reinforced my
desire to use my life to serve Jehovah to the fullest extent.”
Thereafter, Peter started pioneering. He also worked at
Bethel and later began serving as a member of a Regional
Building Committee. “Doing relief work that ?rst time
back in 1974,” says Peter today, “shaped the course of my
life.” Are you young? Could you follow Peter’s example?
Who knows how relief work may shape the course of your
life in Jehovah’s service!

exactly what relief workers today experience. “Doing
relief work made me feel closer to my brothers than
ever before,” says an elder who helped in ?ood relief. One grateful sister who received relief aid put
it this way, “Our brotherhood is the closest thing we
have to Paradise on earth.”—Read Proverbs 17:17.
17

When relief workers arrive at the scene of a

17. (a) How do the words found at Isaiah 41:13 apply to relief work?
(b) Mention some examples of how relief work honors Jehovah and
strengthens our bond of union. (See also the box “Volunteers Around
the World Bring Relief.”)
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

391

disaster, our a?icted brothers experience in a special way the truth of God’s promise: “I, Jehovah your
God, am grasping your right hand, the One saying to
you, ‘Do not be afraid. I will help you.’ ” (Isa. 41:13)
After surviving a disaster, a sister said: “I felt hopeless seeing the damage, but Jehovah extended his
hand. The help I received from the brothers is indescribable.” After a disaster devastated their area,
two elders wrote in behalf of the congregations
where they serve: “The earthquake caused great
pain, but we experienced the help that Jehovah provides through our brothers. We had read about relief
work, but now we saw it carried out in front of our
eyes.”
18

Can You Have a Part?
Would you like to taste the joy that relief work

provides? If so, keep in mind that relief workers are
often selected from those who work on Kingdom
Hall construction projects. So mention to your elders
that you would like to ?ll out an application form.
An elder with much experience in relief work gives
18. What can you do if you want to share in relief work? (See also the
box “It Shaped the Course of His Life.”)
392

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

this reminder: “Travel to a disaster area only after
you have received an o?cial invitation from a Disaster Relief Committee to do so.” In that way, our relief work will proceed in an orderly manner.
Relief work is indeed an outstanding way in
which we obey Christ’s command to “love one another.” By showing such love, we demonstrate that
we are truly Christ’s disciples. (John 13:34, 35) What
a blessing it is for us today to have so many willing
workers who bring glory to Jehovah as they provide
needed relief to those who loyally support God’s
Kingdom!
19

19. How do relief workers help greatly in demonstrating that we are
truly Christ’s disciples?

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How do we know that relief work is part of
our sacred service to Jehovah?
? What are three main objectives of our relief
e?orts?
? Relief work brings what lasting bene?ts?
? How does relief work relate to Jesus’
command found at John 13:34?
THE MINISTRY OF RELIEF

393

VOLUNTEERS AROUND THE
WORLD BRING RELIEF
CENTRAL AND WEST AFRICA
In 1994, some 800,000 or more people in Rwanda were
killed in tribal genocide. In the aftermath of that massacre, unrest spread to other lands in Central Africa, resulting in overcrowded refugee camps. To help their af?icted fellow believers, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Belgium,
France, and Switzerland airlifted some 300 tons of clothing, medicine, tents, food, and other supplies. Within
weeks, those supplies reached our needy brothers.
Also in Africa, a team of ten Witness doctors and nurses from France have been providing relief to our brothers to alleviate their su?ering caused by civil war, famine, and disease. In the past two years alone, the team
handled over 10,000 medical consultations. Their work
brings praise to Jehovah and his organization. “When we
arrive in an area to help our brothers and sisters,” relates one of the nurses, “people say with respect: ‘These
are Jehovah’s Witnesses. They have come to help their
brothers.’ ” After receiving help from a nurse, one Witness exclaimed: “Thank you, my sister. Thank you, Jehovah!”
At times, relief work may also be needed when severe
accidents occur. In 2012, a road accident in Nigeria killed
394

13 Witnesses, all belonging to one small congregation,
and left 54 others seriously injured. A relief committee
organized around-the-clock personal care for each victim. When a hospital patient observed the outpouring of
support that the injured brothers and sisters received,
she telephoned her pastor, saying: “No one from our
church has visited me. Come to the hospital and see love
in action among Jehovah’s Witnesses!”
Though our dear brothers in that small congregation
su?ered a painful loss, they felt comforted by the expressions of love they received from their fellow believers.
Furthermore, after observing the loving care that the relief workers showered on the a?icted brothers, several
individuals in that congregation were moved to intensify
their ministry. Before the accident, the congregation had
35 publishers. Within a year, that number had grown
to 60.

AUSTRALIA
In 2013, parts of Queensland’s coast were hit by a ?ood
that left 70 Witnesses homeless. Mark and Rhonda and
their daughter ?ed their ?ooded home and ended up in
an evacuation center. The place was packed. “It was basically standing room only,” relates Rhonda. The deafening noise from the helicopters that were landing and departing close-by added to the tense atmosphere in the
395

center. Worried, she asked her husband, “What are we
going to do?” Mark fervently prayed to Jehovah, asking
for help. “About 30 minutes later,” says Rhonda, “a car
arrived at the center, and three brothers got out. When
we met, they said: ‘We’re taking you with us. You will stay
at a brother’s house.’ ” Adds Rhonda: “It’s hard to describe the overwhelming emotion we felt at that moment
for the loving care of Jehovah’s organization.”
Over 250 volunteers rushed to that same disaster area
to help their brothers. Says an elderly brother: “A group
of Witnesses came out of nowhere and toiled like ants to
clear up the mess in my home. My wife and I will never
forget how they came to our aid.”

BRAZIL
In 2008, mudslides and ?oods in the state of Santa Catarina forced some 80,000 people out of their homes. It
was like a “tsunami of clay, mud and trees,” said a resident. Some brothers found shelter in an Assembly Hall.
“They escaped with only the clothes they were wearing,
all soaked with mud,” relates Márcio, the hall’s caretaker. Says one sister: “Our house collapsed. It was painful to see it disappear in seconds, but I will never forget
how our brothers and sisters comforted us. We received
so many expressions of love! The experience taught me
how wise it is to treasure spiritual things.”
396

Mudslides have devastated entire neighborhoods on
the mountain slopes near the city of Rio de Janeiro. To respond e?ectively to such recurring disasters,
the brothers formed a permanent Disaster Relief Committee. When there is a threat of imminent mudslides,
monitors (assigned brothers living in the a?ected area)
alert the committee. Quickly, volunteers arrive in trucks
marked with the sign “Jehovah’s Witnesses—Humanitarian Aid.” All members of the well-equipped rescue crews
have preassigned tasks. The workers wear vests that
clearly identify them as Jehovah’s Witnesses. Together
with brothers of the Hospital Liaison Committees, they
provide aid to injured brothers and sisters. Relief workers bring in food, water, medical supplies, clothing, and
cleaning products. Cleaning mud from houses is a huge
task. After one recent mudslide, it took 60 volunteers to
remove four truckloads of mud from just one home!

397

SECTION 7

K INGD OM P ROMISES
Making All Things New
YOU pluck a luscious apple from the branch. You take in its
aroma before adding it to the growing mound in the basket.
You have been working for hours, but you feel ?ne and ready
for a bit more work. Your mother is at a tree nearby, happily working and chatting with other family members and
friends who are helping with the harvest. She looks so young
—the way you remember her when you were just a child all
those years ago. It is hard to believe that you saw her grow
old in the world that is now long gone. You saw her waste
away with illness, you held her hand as she breathed her last,
and you wept at her graveside. Yet, here she is, along with
so many others, alive and healthy again!
Such days will come; we know it. We know it because God’s
promises always come true. In this section, we will consider
how some Kingdom promises will be ful?lled in the near future, leading up to the war of Armageddon. We will also review some of the thrilling Kingdom promises that will be
ful?lled thereafter. How delighted we will be to see the time
when God’s Kingdom rules over this whole earth, making
all things new!

21

God’s Kingdom Removes
Its Enemies

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

The events leading up to the war of Armageddon

IT HAS been faith-strengthening to review what
God’s Kingdom has accomplished in the midst of its
enemies. (Ps. 110:2) Our King has raised up an army
of willing preachers. He has cleansed and re?ned his
followers spiritually and morally. And despite all efforts of enemies of the Kingdom to divide us, we enjoy worldwide unity today. These and the many other Kingdom accomplishments we have considered
provide overwhelming evidence that since 1914, our
King has been ruling in the midst of enemies of the
Kingdom.
2

The Kingdom will do even more amazing things

in the near future. It will “come” to “crush and put
an end” to its enemies. (Matt. 6:10; Dan. 2:44) But
before that time arrives, other signi?cant events will
1, 2. (a) What evidence shows that our King has been ruling since
1914? (b) What will we consider in this chapter?
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

399

take place. What are they? Several Bible prophecies
address that question. Let us examine some of those
prophecies to see what events still lie ahead of us.
3

Precursor of “Sudden Destruction”
Proclaiming peace. In writing to the Thessalo-

nians, the apostle Paul described the ?rst development that we are awaiting. (Read 1 Thessalonians 5:
2, 3.) In this letter Paul mentions “Jehovah’s day,”
which will begin with the attack on “Babylon the
Great.” (Rev. 17:5) However, just before Jehovah’s
day begins, nations will be saying, “Peace and security!” This expression may refer to one pronouncement or to a series of notable statements. Will religious leaders be involved? Since they are part of the
world, they will possibly join the nations in saying,
“There is peace!” (Jer. 6:14; 23:16, 17; Rev. 17:1, 2)
This proclaiming of peace and security will signal
that the day of Jehovah is about to begin. Enemies
of God’s Kingdom “will by no means escape.”
4

How do we bene?t from understanding the sig-

3. What is the ?rst development that we are awaiting?
4. How do we bene?t from understanding the signi?cance of Paul’s
prophecy about the proclamation of peace and security?
400

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ni?cance of this prophecy? Paul states: “You are not
in darkness, so that the day should overtake you as
it would thieves.” (1 Thess. 5:3, 4) Unlike people in
general, we discern where current events are heading. In exactly what manner will this prophecy about
peace and security be ful?lled? We must wait and see
how the world scene develops. Therefore, “let us stay
awake and keep our senses.”—1 Thess. 5:6; Zeph. 3:8.
5

The Great Tribulation B egins
Attack on religion. Recall that Paul wrote: “When-

ever it is that they are saying, ‘Peace and security!’
then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them.”
Just as a ?ash of lightning is closely followed by the
crash of thunder, so the time of saying “Peace and
security!” will be instantly followed by “sudden destruction.” What will be destroyed? First, “Babylon
the Great,” the world empire of false religion, also
known as “the prostitute.” (Rev. 17:5, 6, 15) This destruction of Christendom and all other false religious
organizations forms the opening phase of the “great
tribulation.” (Matt. 24:21; 2 Thess. 2:8) For many,
5. What will be the opening phase of the “great tribulation”?
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

401

this event will come as a surprise. Why? Because up
to that point, the prostitute will think of herself as
a “queen” who will “never see mourning.” But she
will suddenly discover that her con?dence is misplaced. She will be removed quickly, as if “in one
day.”—Rev. 18:7, 8.
Who or what will carry out the attack against
“Babylon the Great”? A “wild beast” with “ten
horns.” The book of Revelation indicates that this
wild beast refers to the United Nations (UN). The
ten horns represent all present political powers that
support this “scarlet-colored wild beast.” (Rev. 17:3,
5, 11, 12) How devastating will the attack be? The nations of the UN will plunder the prostitute’s wealth,
devour her, and “completely burn her.”—Read Revelation 17:16.1[1]
6

7

Cutting short the days. Our King revealed what

1[1] It seems reasonable that the destruction of “Babylon the
Great” refers mainly to the destruction of the religious institutions,
not to a wholesale slaughter of all religious people. Hence, most of
Babylon’s former adherents will survive that destruction and, at
least openly, will then likely try to distance themselves from religion, as indicated at Zechariah 13:4-6.

6. Who or what will carry out the attack against “Babylon the Great”?
7. How were Jesus’ words at Matthew 24:21, 22 ful?lled in the ?rst
century C.E., and what ful?llment will they have in the future?
402

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

will occur at this point during the great tribulation.
Jesus stated: “On account of the chosen ones those
days will be cut short.” (Read Matthew 24:21, 22.) Jesus’ words were ful?lled on a small scale in 66 C.E.
when Jehovah “cut short” the Roman army’s attack
on Jerusalem. (Mark 13:20) That action allowed
Christians in Jerusalem and Judea to be saved. What
will then happen on a global scale during the coming great tribulation? Jehovah, by means of our
King, will “cut short” the United Nations’ attack on
religion so that the true religion will not be destroyed with the false. Thus, while all false religious
organizations will be torn down, the one true religion will survive. (Ps. 96:5) Let us now consider what
events will occur after this part of the great tribulation has passed.
8

Events Leading Up to Armageddon
Jesus’ prophecy about the last days indicates that

several signi?cant developments will take place during the time leading up to Armageddon. The ?rst
two events that we will consider are both mentioned
8, 9. To what phenomena may Jesus have referred, and how will people react to what they observe?
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

403

WHAT THE NEAR FUTURE HOLDS
Before the Kingdom comes to put an end to its enemies,
several signi?cant events will take place. God’s Word reveals
what lies ahead of us (See paragraph 2)

Precursor of the
Great Tribulation

The Great
Tribulation Begins

Events
Leading Up to
Armageddon

Pronouncement of
peace and security
(1 Thess. 5:2, 3)

Attack on religion
(Rev. 17:16)

Celestial phenomena
(Matt. 24:29)

(S ee paragraphs 5, 6)

(S ee paragraph 9)

Attack cut short
(Matt. 24:21, 22)

Judgment of
sheep and goats
(Matt. 25:31-33)

(S ee paragraphs 3, 4)

Final sealing of the
remnant of anointed
Christians
(Rev. 7:1-3)
(S ee paragraph 15)

(S ee paragraph 7)

(S ee paragraph 10)

Attack of Gog
of Magog
(Ezek. 38:2, 11, 15)
(S ee paragraphs 12-14)

404

Jehovah sends his King
to defend all loyal ones
(Ezek. 38:18)
(S ee paragraphs 13, 16-18)

Finale of the
Great Tribulation
A

ARMAGEDD ON
(Matt. 25:46; Rev. 16:16)

Gathering to
heaven of the
remaining
anointed ones
(Matt. 24:31)

(S ee paragraphs 16, 17)

(S ee paragraph 15)

405

in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke.—Read
Matthew 24:29-31; Mark 13:23-27; Luke 21:25-28.
9

Celestial phenomena. Jesus foretells: “The sun will

be darkened, and the moon will not give its light,
and the stars will fall from heaven.” Certainly the
religious leaders will not be looked to for light
—they will no longer be identi?ed as such. Was Jesus also referring to a supernatural manifestation in
the heavens? Perhaps he was. (Isa. 13:9-11; Joel 2:1,
30, 31) How will people react to what they observe?
They will be in “anguish” because of “not knowing
the way out.” (Luke 21:25; Zeph. 1:17) Yes, enemies of God’s Kingdom—from ‘kings to slaves’—will
grow “faint out of fear and expectation of the things
coming” and will run for cover. Yet, they will ?nd no
hiding place secure enough for them to escape the
wrath of our King.—Luke 21:26; 23:30; Rev. 6:15-17.
10

Pronouncement of judgment. All enemies of God’s

Kingdom will then be forced to witness an event that
will intensify their agony. Jesus states: “They will see
the Son of man coming in the clouds with great pow10. What judgment will be pronounced by Jesus, and how will supporters and opposers of God’s Kingdom react to it?
406

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

er and glory.” (Mark 13:26) This supernatural display of power will signal that Jesus has come to
pronounce judgment. In another part of this same
prophecy about the last days, Jesus gives more details about the judgment that will be pronounced at
this time. We ?nd that information in the parable of
the sheep and the goats. (Read Matthew 25:31-33, 46.)
Loyal supporters of God’s Kingdom will be judged
as “sheep” and will “lift up [their] heads,” realizing
that their “deliverance is getting near.” (Luke 21:
28) However, Kingdom opposers will be judged as
“goats” and will “beat themselves in grief,” realizing
that “everlasting cutting-o?” awaits them.—Matt. 24:
30; Rev. 1:7.
11

After Jesus pronounces his judgment on “all the

nations,” several signi?cant events are still to occur
before the war of Armageddon begins. (Matt. 25:32)
We will consider two of those events: the attack of
Gog and the gathering of anointed ones. As we examine those two events, we need to keep in mind
that God’s Word does not reveal the exact timing of
11. What should we keep in mind as we consider coming events?
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

407

these events. In fact, it seems likely that one will
overlap the other to some extent.
12

An all-out attack. Gog of Magog will attack the

remaining anointed ones and their other sheep companions. (Read Ezekiel 38:2, 11.) This attack against
established Kingdom rule will be Satan’s last battle
in a war that he has been waging against the anointed remnant since his expulsion from heaven. (Rev.
12:7-9, 17) Especially since the anointed ones began
to be gathered into the restored Christian congregation, Satan has tried to destroy their spiritual prosperity—but to no avail. (Matt. 13:30) However, at
the time when all false religious organizations are
gone and God’s people are seemingly living “unprotected by walls, bars, or gates,” Satan will see a golden opportunity. He will incite his wicked enforcers
to move in for an all-out attack on those who are
Kingdom supporters.
13

Ezekiel describes what will happen. Regarding

Gog, the prophecy states: “You will come from your
place, from the remotest parts of the north, you and
12. What will be Satan’s all-out battle against the Kingdom?
13. How will Jehovah intervene in behalf of his people?
408

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great assembly, a vast army. Like clouds covering the land, you will come against my people.”
(Ezek. 38:15, 16) What will be Jehovah’s response to
this seemingly unstoppable invasion? “My great rage
will ?are up,” declares Jehovah. “I will call for a
sword.” (Ezek. 38:18, 21; read Zechariah 2:8.) Jehovah
will intervene in behalf of his servants on earth.
That intervention is the war of Armageddon.
14

Before we move forward in time to consider

how Jehovah will defend his people during the war
of Armageddon, let us pause for a moment and examine another signi?cant event. This one will occur
at some point between the beginning of Satan’s allout attack and the beginning of Jehovah’s intervention at Armageddon. As noted in paragraph 11, this
second event is the gathering of the remaining ones
of the anointed remnant.
15

Gathering of anointed ones. Both Matthew and

Mark recorded Jesus’ statement about the “chosen
ones”—spirit-anointed Christians—as part of a series
14, 15. What other event will occur at some point after the beginning
of Satan’s all-out attack?
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

409

of events that will occur before the outbreak of Armageddon. (See paragraph 7.) Speaking about himself as King, Jesus prophesies: “Then he will send
out the angels and will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from earth’s extremity
to heaven’s extremity.” (Mark 13:27; Matt. 24:31) To
what act of gathering is Jesus here referring? He is
not speaking about the ?nal sealing of the remnant
of anointed Christians, which will occur just before
the great tribulation begins. (Rev. 7:1-3) Instead, Jesus refers to an event that will take place during
the coming great tribulation. Thus, apparently at
some point after the start of Satan’s all-out attack
on God’s people, anointed ones who still remain on
earth will be gathered to heaven.
16

How does this gathering of the anointed rem-

nant relate to the event that will occur next, Armageddon? The timing of the gathering indicates that
all anointed ones will be in heaven before God’s war
of Armageddon begins. In heaven, the 144,000 corulers with Christ will receive authority to share
16. What share will the resurrected anointed ones have in the war of
Armageddon?
410

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

with Jesus in wielding “an iron rod” of destruction
against all enemies of God’s Kingdom. (Rev. 2:26, 27)
Then, together with powerful angels, the resurrected
anointed ones will follow Christ, the Warrior-King,
as he sets out to confront the “vast army” of enemies that is closing in on its prey—Jehovah’s people.
(Ezek. 38:15) When that violent confrontation takes
place, the war of Armageddon is on!—Rev. 16:16.
17

The Grand Finale of the Great Tribulation
Execution of judgment. The war of Armageddon

will be the ?nale of the great tribulation. At that
point, Jesus will take on an added task. Besides being the Judge of “all the nations,” he will also become the Executioner of nations—that is, of all
the people whom he had earlier judged as “goats.”
(Matt. 25:32, 33) With “a sharp, long sword,” our
King will “strike the nations.” Yes, all goatlike ones
—from “kings” to “slaves”—“will depart into everlasting cutting-o?.”—Rev. 19:15, 18; Matt. 25:46.
18

How the tables will have turned for those whom

17. What will happen to “the goats” during Armageddon?
18. (a) How will the tables turn for “the sheep”? (b) How will Jesus
complete his victory?
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

411

Jesus judged as “sheep”! Instead of being nearly
trampled underfoot by Satan’s vast army of “goats,”
“a great crowd” of seemingly defenseless “sheep” will
survive the enemy attack and will “come out of the
great tribulation.” (Rev. 7:9, 14) Then, after Jesus has
conquered and removed all human enemies of God’s
Kingdom, he will hurl Satan and his demons into the
abyss. There they will be kept in a deathlike, inactive
state for a thousand years.—Read Revelation 6:2; 20:
1-3.
19

How to Prepare Ourselves
How can we prepare ourselves for the earth-

shaking events that are to come? The Watchtower stated some years ago: “Survival will depend on obedience.” Why is that so? The answer is found in a
warning from Jehovah to the captive Jews living
in ancient Babylon. Jehovah foretold that Babylon
would be conquered, but what were God’s people to
do to prepare themselves for that event? Jehovah
stated: “Go, my people, enter your inner rooms, and
shut your doors behind you. Hide yourself for a
19, 20. How can we apply the lesson contained in the words found at
Isaiah 26:20 and 30:21?
412

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

brief moment until the wrath has passed by.” (Isa.
26:20) Note the verbs in this verse: “go,” “enter,”
“shut,” “hide”—all are in the imperative mood; they
are commands. The Jews who heeded those commands would have stayed in their houses, away from
the conquering soldiers out in the streets. Hence,
their survival depended on obeying Jehovah’s instructions.1[2]
20

What is the lesson for us? As in the case of

those ancient servants of God, our survival of coming events will depend on our obedience to Jehovah’s
instructions. (Isa. 30:21) Such instructions come to
us through the congregation arrangement. Therefore,
we want to develop heartfelt obedience to the guidance we are receiving. (1 John 5:3) If we do so today, we will be more inclined to obey willingly in the
future and thus receive the protection of our Father,
Jehovah, and our King, Jesus. (Zeph. 2:3) That divine protection will allow us to witness ?rsthand
how God’s Kingdom will completely remove its enemies. What an unforgettable event that will be!
1[2] For more information, see Isaiah’s Prophecy—Light for All Mankind I, pages 282-283.
GOD’S KINGDOM REMOVES ITS ENEMIES

413

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? What Kingdom accomplishments considered
in this publication have especially
strengthened your faith?
? What are some of the events that lie ahead
of us?
? How will our King protect us before and
during Armageddon?
? How can we prepare ourselves for the events
that are to come?

414

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

22

The Kingdom Carries Out
God’s Will on Earth

FOCUS OF CHAPTER

The Kingdom ful?lls all of God’s promises regarding
mankind and the earth

A FAITHFUL brother arrives at the meeting, tired
after a stressful day. He has faced mistreatment from
a demanding boss, stress over the challenges of caring for his family, and anxiety over an illness a?icting his wife. As the music for the opening song begins, he breathes a sigh of relief, glad to be at the
Kingdom Hall with his brothers and sisters. The
song is about the hope of life in Paradise, and
the lyrics ask him to picture that hope, to see himself in that setting. He has always loved this song,
and as he sings it along with his family, hope stirs
within his troubled heart.
2

Have you ever felt that way? Most of us have. Ad-

mittedly, though, life in this old system can make it
1, 2. (a) Why may it be di?cult at times to see the Paradise as real?
(b) What can help us to strengthen our faith in God’s promises?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

415

very di?cult for us to see the coming Paradise as a
reality. These are “critical times hard to deal with,”
and the world we live in is anything but paradisaic.
(2 Tim. 3:1) What can help us to see our hope as
real? Well, how do we really know that soon God’s
Kingdom will rule all mankind? Let us consider a
few of the prophecies from Jehovah that his people
saw ful?lled in the ancient past. Then we will review
how those and similar prophecies are undergoing a
thrilling ful?llment right now. Finally, with our faith
thus bolstered, we will focus on what such prophecies mean for our future.
How Jehovah Ful?lled His Promises
in the Distant Past
3 Imagine what life was like for the Jews living in
exile in Babylon back in the sixth century B.C.E.
Many grew up in exile, as did their parents, and life
was hard. The Babylonians ridiculed them for their
faith in Jehovah. (Ps. 137:1-3) Through the decades,
loyal Jews kept clinging to this one bright hope: Jehovah promised to gather his people back to their
homeland. Jehovah said that conditions would be
3. What promise comforted the Jews living in exile in Babylon?
416

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

wonderful there. He even compared the restored
land of Judah to the garden of Eden—a paradise!
(Read Isaiah 51:3.) Such promises were clearly designed to reassure God’s people, addressing doubts
that might trouble their hearts. How so? Consider
some speci?c prophecies.
4 Security. Those exiles would return, not to a literal paradise, but to a distant land that had lain desolate for 70 years, a land that few of them had ever
seen. Lions were common in Bible lands back then,
as were wolves, leopards, and other predators. A
family man might wonder, ‘How will I keep my wife
and children safe? What about the sheep and cattle
—how will I protect them?’ Such concerns would be
only natural. Think, then, of God’s promise recorded at Isaiah 11:6-9 and of how comforting it must
have been. (Read.) With those lovely poetic words, Jehovah assured the exiles that they and their livestock
would be safe. The lion would eat straw in the sense
that it would not devour the Jews’ cattle. Faithful
ones would have nothing to fear from such predators. Jehovah promised that his people would be safe
4. How did Jehovah assure the Jews regarding security in their homeland?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

417

in the restored land of Judah, even in the wilderness
and in the forests.—Ezek. 34:25.
5

Abundance. Other concerns might arise. ‘Will I be

able to feed my family in the restored homeland?
Where will we live? Will there be any work, and will
it be better than the drudgery of living in exile under the thumb of our conquerors?’ Through inspired
prophecies, Jehovah considerately addressed those
questions too. Jehovah promised that his obedient
people would ?nd the rains reliable; as a result, the
ground would produce “abundant and rich” bread.
(Isa. 30:23) As to shelter and meaningful work, Jehovah promised concerning his people: “They will
build houses and live in them, and they will plant
vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build
for someone else to inhabit, nor will they plant for
others to eat.” (Isa. 65:21, 22) Yes, in many ways life
would be wonderful compared with their exile in pagan Babylon. But what about their most serious
problems—the ones that led to their exile in the ?rst
place?
5. What prophecies helped the returning exiles to be con?dent that Jehovah would provide abundantly for their needs?
418

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Spiritual health. Long before their exile, God’s
people had grown spiritually sick. Through the
prophet Isaiah, Jehovah said of his people: “The
whole head is sick, and the whole heart is diseased.”
(Isa. 1:5) Spiritually, they were blind and deaf, for
they kept stopping up their ears to Jehovah’s counsel and closing their eyes to the enlightenment he offered. (Isa. 6:10; Jer. 5:21; Ezek. 12:2) If the same
problems were to plague the returning exiles, what
security could they have? Would they not simply lose
Jehovah’s favor again? How reassuring was Jehovah’s
promise: “In that day the deaf will hear the words of
the book, and out of the gloom and darkness the
eyes of the blind will see.” (Isa. 29:18) Yes, Jehovah
would bring spiritual healing to his chastened, repentant people. As long as they remained responsive
and obedient, he would provide life-giving direction
and enlightenment.
6

Did Jehovah live up to his promises? The answer is a matter of historical record. The Jews
7

6. God’s people had long su?ered from what kind of health problems,
and of what did Jehovah assure the returning exiles?
7. How were God’s promises to his exiled people ful?lled, and why
should we ?nd that ful?llment faith-strengthening?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

419

who returned to their homeland were blessed with
security, abundance, and spiritual health. For example, Jehovah protected them from neighboring peoples who were stronger and more numerous than
they. Predators did not wipe out the Jews’ livestock.
True, those Jews saw only a limited ful?llment of the
paradisaic prophecies that men such as Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel wrote down—but the ful?llment
that God’s people saw was thrilling and just what
they needed at the time. As we re?ect on what Jehovah did for his people back then, our faith will grow
stronger. If the initial, limited ful?llment of those
prophecies was exciting, what would the greater ful?llment be like? Consider what Jehovah has done for
us today.
How Jehovah Has Started
to Ful?ll His Promises in Our Own T ime
8 Jehovah’s people do not now form a literal nation, nor do they occupy a single, physical land.
Rather, anointed Christians make up a spiritual nation, “the Israel of God.” (Gal. 6:16) Their companions of the “other sheep” join them in a spiritual
8. God’s people today enjoy what sort of “land”?
420

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

“land,” a realm of activity in which they worship Jehovah God unitedly. That worship is their way of
life. (John 10:16; Isa. 66:8) And what kind of a “land”
has Jehovah given us? It is a spiritual paradise. Here
God’s promises about Edenic conditions have seen a
wonderful spiritual ful?llment. Consider some examples.
9

Security. In the prophecy recorded at Isaiah 11:

6-9, we ?nd a delightful picture of harmony and
peace—between wild animals on the one hand and
humans with their domestic animals on the other.
Does that picture ?nd a spiritual ful?llment today?
Yes! In verse 9, we learn why it is that such creatures
will cause neither harm nor ruin: “Because the earth
will certainly be ?lled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea.” Does “knowledge
of Jehovah” change the behavior of animals? No, it
is people who are transformed by coming to know
the Most High God and learning to imitate his
peaceful ways. That is why in our spiritual paradise
today, we can observe a heartwarming ful?llment of
9, 10. (a) How is the prophecy of Isaiah 11:6-9 being ful?lled today?
(b) What evidence of peace do we ?nd among God’s people?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

421

that prophecy. Under Kingdom rule, Christ’s followers are learning to put o? their ?erce, animalistic
qualities and live in peace and harmony with their
spiritual brothers and sisters.
10

For example, in this publication we have dis-

cussed the matter of Christian neutrality—both the
Scriptural basis for our understanding and the resulting persecution that God’s people have faced for
taking a neutral stand. Is it not remarkable that in
this violent world, there is a sizable “nation” of people who refuse, even under threat of death, to take
part in violence of any kind? What remarkable proof
this is that the subjects of the Messianic King are indeed enjoying peace like that described by Isaiah! Jesus proclaimed that his followers would be known
by the love they had among themselves. (John 13:34,
35) Within the congregation, Christ is patiently using his “faithful and discreet slave” to teach all
true Christians to be peaceable, loving, and gentle.
—Matt. 24:45-47.
11

Abundance. The world su?ers from spiritual fam-

11, 12. What kind of famine a?icts today’s world, yet how has Jehovah provided abundantly for his people?
422

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

ine. The Bible warned: “ ‘Look! The days are coming,’
declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when I will
send a famine into the land, not a famine for bread
or a thirst for water, but for hearing the words of Jehovah.’ ” (Amos 8:11) Do the citizens of God’s Kingdom su?er famine too? Jehovah foretold the following contrast between his people and his enemies:
“My servants will eat, but you will go hungry. Look!
My servants will drink, but you will go thirsty. Look!
My servants will rejoice, but you will su?er shame.”
(Isa. 65:13) Have you observed the ful?llment of
those words?
Spiritual provisions ?ow to us like an everbroadening and ever-deepening river. Our Biblebased publications—as well as recordings and videos, our meetings and conventions, and the material
published on our Web site—together amount to an
ongoing ?ood tide of spiritual sustenance in this
spiritually starving world. (Ezek. 47:1-12; Joel 3:18)
Are you not thrilled to see the ful?llment of Jehovah’s promises of abundance in your daily life? Do
you make sure that you feed regularly at Jehovah’s
table?
12

THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

423

Spiritual health. Spiritual blindness and deafness
are pandemic today. (2 Cor. 4:4) Yet, Christ is curing in?rmities and illnesses worldwide. Have you
seen blind eyes opened and deaf ears unstopped? If
you have seen people come to an accurate knowledge of the truth of God’s Word, letting go of the religious lies that once made them blind and deaf to
the truth, you have seen this promise ful?lled: “In
that day the deaf will hear the words of the book,
and out of the gloom and darkness the eyes of the
blind will see.” (Isa. 29:18) Around the world, hundreds of thousands of people every year are ?nding
such spiritual cures. Each person who leaves Babylon the Great behind and joins us to worship in
our spiritual paradise is living proof that Jehovah’s
promises have come true!
13

Each chapter of this book contains powerful evidence that Christ has brought his followers into a
genuine spiritual paradise in this time of the end.
Let us keep meditating on the many ways in which
we are being blessed in that paradise today. As we
14

13. How have you seen ful?llment of Jehovah’s promise about blind
eyes being opened and deaf ears unstopped?
14. Meditating on what evidence will strengthen our faith?
424

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

do, our faith in Jehovah’s promises for the future
will continue to grow stronger.
“Let Your Kingdom Come”
15 Jehovah’s purpose has long been to make the
earth a global paradise. He placed Adam and Eve in
a paradise garden, and he gave them the command
to ?ll the earth with their o?spring and to take care
of all of its creatures. (Gen. 1:28) Instead, Adam and
Eve followed Satan into rebellion and plunged all
their o?spring into imperfection, sin, and death.
Yet, God’s purpose never changed. Once spoken, his
words always ?nd complete ful?llment. (Read Isaiah
55:10, 11.) We may be sure, then, that the descendants of Adam and Eve will ?ll this earth and subdue it, taking loving care of Jehovah’s creation in a
global paradise. At that time, the prophecies originally given to the Jewish exiles about life in paradisaic conditions will reach their ultimate ful?llment!
Consider the following examples.
Security. At long last, the heartwarming word
picture painted at Isaiah 11:6-9 will see a complete
16

15. Why may we be sure that the earth will become a paradise?
16. How does the Bible describe the security we will enjoy in Paradise?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

425

ful?llment even in a literal sense. Men, women, and
children will be safe and secure wherever they go on
earth. No creature, whether human or animal, will
pose any threat. Imagine a time when you will see
this entire planet as your home, where you can swim
in the rivers, lakes, and seas; traverse the mountain
ranges; and roam the grasslands in complete safety.
And when night falls, you will not worry. The words
of Ezekiel 34:25 will come true, so that it will even
be possible for God’s people to “dwell securely in
the wilderness and sleep in the forests.”
17

Abundance. Picture a time when there will be no

such thing as poverty, malnutrition, famine, or welfare systems. The spiritual plenty that God’s people
enjoy today is a guarantee that the Messianic King
will feed his subjects in every respect. When Jesus was on the earth, he demonstrated on a small
scale that he can ful?ll such promises, for he fed
thousands of hungry people with just a few loaves
and ?sh. (Matt. 14:17, 18; 15:34-36; Mark 8:19, 20)
When God’s Kingdom is ruling over the whole earth,
17. Why may we be sure that Jehovah will provide abundantly for our
needs when the Kingdom is ruling over the whole earth?
426

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

prophecies like this one will see a literal ful?llment:
“He will give the rain for the seed you sow in the
ground, and the bread that the ground produces will
be abundant and rich. In that day your livestock will
graze in spacious pastures.”—Isa. 30:23.
18

Today many people can hardly imagine owning

a comfortable home or having rewarding, satisfying
work to do. In this corrupt system, many feel that
they work long and hard with little real bene?t to
themselves or their family, while the rich and greedy
reap all the rewards. Imagine what it will be like
when this prophecy comes true worldwide: “They
will build houses and live in them, and they will
plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not
build for someone else to inhabit, nor will they plant
for others to eat. For the days of my people will be
like the days of a tree, and the work of their hands
my chosen ones will enjoy to the full.”—Isa. 65:20-22.
19

What does it mean that our days will be “like

the days of a tree”? When you stand at the base of a
18, 19. (a) What does the prophecy recorded at Isaiah 65:20-22
mean to you? (b) In what sense will our days be “like the days of a
tree”?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

427

massive tree, do you feel a sense of awe sweeping
over you as you contemplate how long that living
thing has been there—perhaps since long before
your great-grandparents were born? It might occur
to you that if you were to remain in your present imperfect state, such a tree would likely outlive you,
still stretching out its long, peaceful existence even
after you had become a mere memory. How kind of
Jehovah to assure us that in the Paradise to come,
our own days will be long and peaceful! (Ps. 37:11,
29) The day will come when even long-lived trees
will seem to us as transient as the grass, coming and
going while we continue living forever!
Perfect health. Today, sickness and death cast
their grim shadows over every aspect of this world.
In a sense, we are all sick—infected with a terminal
illness called sin. The only cure is Christ’s ransom
sacri?ce. (Rom. 3:23; 6:23) During the Millennial
Reign, Jesus and his corulers will fully apply the
bene?ts of that sacri?ce, gradually eradicating all
traces of sin from faithful humans. Isaiah’s prophecy will come true in the fullest sense: “No resident
20

20. How will loyal Kingdom subjects come to enjoy perfect health?
428

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

will say: ‘I am sick.’ The people dwelling in the land
will be pardoned for their error.” (Isa. 33:24) Imagine a time when no one will be blind, deaf, or crippled. (Read Isaiah 35:5, 6.) No illness will prove to
be beyond Jesus’ ability to heal—whether physical,
mental, or emotional. Loyal Kingdom subjects will
enjoy perfect health!
21

What, though, of the common outcome of sick-

ness, the inevitable result of sin—death? That is our
“last enemy,” the one foe against which all imperfect
humans sooner or later prove powerless. (1 Cor. 15:
26) But is death such a daunting adversary to Jehovah? Notice what Isaiah foretold: “He will swallow
up death forever, and the Sovereign Lord Jehovah
will wipe away the tears from all faces.” (Isa. 25:8)
Can you picture that time? No more funerals, no
more cemeteries, no more tears of grief! Quite the
contrary—there will be tears of joy as Jehovah ful?lls his thrilling promise to bring back the dead!
(Read Isaiah 26:19.) At last, countless wounds in?icted by death will heal.
21. What will become of death, and why do you ?nd that promise comforting?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

429

By the end of the Millennium, the Kingdom will
have ?nished carrying out God’s will on earth, and
Christ will hand the rulership over to his Father.
(1 Cor. 15:25-28) Humankind, perfected at last, will
be ready to face a ?nal test when Satan is released
from his abyss of inactivity. Thereafter, Christ will
?nally crush that vile serpent and all his supporters.
(Gen. 3:15; Rev. 20:3, 7-10) But all who loyally love
Jehovah will face a bright prospect. Perhaps no
words could paint a better picture than the ones we
?nd in an inspired phrase. It is the promise that
faithful ones will have “the glorious freedom of the
children of God.”—Rom. 8:21.
22

Those promises are not based on mere hopes,
wishes, or dreams. Ful?llment of Jehovah’s promises is a certainty! Why? Remember the words of Jesus that we discussed in the opening chapter of this
book. He taught his followers to pray to Jehovah:
“Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place,
as in heaven, also on earth.” (Matt. 6:9, 10) God’s
23

22. What will happen when the Messianic Kingdom has ?nished carrying out God’s will on earth?
23, 24. (a) Why is the ful?llment of God’s promises a certainty?
(b) What are you determined to do?
430

GOD’S KINGDOM RULES!

Kingdom is not the product of someone’s imagination. It is a reality! It rules in heaven right now. For
a century now, it has ful?lled Jehovah’s promises in
ways that we can clearly see in the Christian congregation. We may be sure, then, that all of Jehovah’s promises will be ful?lled when God’s Kingdom
comes to exert its full power toward the earth!
We know that God’s Kingdom will come. We
know that Jehovah’s every word of promise will
come true. Why? Because GOD’S KINGD OM
RULES! The question for each of us to ask is, ‘Does
the Kingdom rule me?’ Let us do all we can to live
as loyal subjects of that Kingdom now, so that we
may bene?t from its perfect, just rule forever!
24

How Real Is the Kingdom to You?
? How did Jehovah ful?ll his promises
regarding the Jews returning from exile?
? How has Jehovah allowed us to enjoy a
spiritual paradise today?
? What aspects of life in Paradise appeal to you
the most?
? What convinces you that God’s Kingdom is
real and is now ruling?
THE KINGDOM CARRIES OUT GOD’S WILL ON EARTH

431

SELECTED OFFICES OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES

