Was Life Created?

What do you believe?
Many religious fundamentalists believe that the
earth and everything on it was created in six
24-hour days, just a few thousand years ago.
Some atheists would have you believe that
God does not exist, that the Bible is a book of
myths, and that all life is the product of random,
undirected events.

The majority of people hold views that are somewhere between these opposing ideas. The fact that you are reading this
brochure likely indicates that you are one of them. You may believe in God and respect the Bible. But you may also value the
opinion of highly trained and in?uential scientists who do not believe that life was created. If you are a parent, you may wonder
how to answer your children when they ask questions about evolution and creation.

What is the purpose of this brochure?

2

WAS LIFE CREATED?

Cover: Beach and reef: 5 Digital Vision Ltd/age fotostock

It is not the purpose of this material to ridicule the views either
of fundamentalists or of those who choose not to believe in God.
Rather, it is our hope that this brochure will prompt you to examine again the basis for some of your beliefs. It will present an explanation of the Bible’s account of creation that you may not
have previously considered. And it will emphasize why it really
does matter what you believe about how life began.
Will you trust the claims of those who say that there is no intelligent Creator and that the Bible is unreliable? Or will you examine what the Bible actually says? Which teachings are worthy
of your trust, your faith: those of the Bible or those of evolutionists? (Hebrews 11:1) Why not review the facts?

Contents
PAGE 4

The Living Planet

PAGE 11

Who Designed
It First?
PAGE 18

Evolution—Myths
and Facts
PAGE 24

Science and the
Genesis Account
PAGE 29

Does It Matter
What You Believe?
PAGE 30

Bibliography

This publication is not for sale.
It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by
voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit
www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated,
Scripture quotations are from the
modern-language New World
Translation of the Holy Scriptures
—With References.
Was Life Created?
October 2016 Printing
English (lc-E)
5 2010
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT
SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of
New York, Inc., Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

The living planet
Life on earth could never exist were it not for a series of very fortunate “coincidences,” some of which were unknown or poorly understood until the 20th century.
Those coincidences include the following:
?

Earth’s location in the Milky Way galaxy and the solar system, as well as the
planet’s orbit, tilt, rotational speed, and unusual moon

?

A magnetic ?eld and an atmosphere that serve as a dual shield

?

Natural cycles that replenish and cleanse the planet’s air and water supply

As you consider each of these topics, ask yourself, ‘Are earth’s features a product
of blind chance or of purposeful design?’

4

WAS LIFE CREATED?

Could the earth be located in
a better position to host life?

When you write down your address,
what do you include? You might put in
your country, city, and street. By way of
comparison, let’s call the Milky Way galaxy earth’s “country,” the solar system
—that is, the sun and its planets—earth’s
“city,” and earth’s orbit within the solar system earth’s “street.” Thanks to advances in astronomy and physics, scientists have gained deep insights into the
merits of our special spot in the universe.
To begin with, our “city,” or solar system, is located in the ideal region of the
Milky Way galaxy—not too close to the
center and not too far from it. This “habitable zone,” as scientists call it, contains

THE LIVING PLANET

5

& NASA/JPL/Caltech

Earth’s perfect “address”

just the right concentrations of the chemical elements needed to support life. Farther out, those elements are too scarce;
farther in, the neighborhood is too dangerous because of the greater abundance
of potentially lethal radiation and other
factors. “We live in prime real estate,”
says Scientific American magazine.1
The ideal “street”: No less “prime” is
earth’s “street,” or orbit within our solar system “city.” About 93 million miles
from the sun, this orbit lies within a limited zone that is habitable because life neither freezes nor fries. Moreover, earth’s
path is almost circular, keeping us roughly the same distance from the sun yearround.
The sun, meanwhile, is the perfect
“powerhouse.” It is stable, it is the ideal
size, and it emits just the right amount
of energy. For good reason, it has been
called “a very special star.”2
The perfect “neighbor”: If you had to
choose a “next-door neighbor” for the
earth, you could not improve on the
moon. Its diameter measures just over a
quarter of that of the earth. Thus, when

6

WAS LIFE CREATED?

Earth’s protective shields
Space is a dangerous place where lethal radiation is common and meteoroids are an ever-present danger. Yet,
our blue planet seems to ?y through
this galactic “shooting gallery” with relative impunity. Why? Because earth is
protected by amazing armor—a powerful
magnetic ?eld and a custom-made atmosphere.
Earth’s magnetic field: The center of
the earth is a spinning ball of molten iron,
which causes our planet to have a huge
and powerful magnetic ?eld that stretches far into space. This shield protects us
from the full intensity of cosmic radiation
and from potentially deadly forces emanating from the sun. The latter include
the solar wind, which is a steady stream
of energetic particles; solar ?ares, which
in minutes release as much energy as billions of hydrogen bombs; and explosions
in the outer region, or corona, of the
sun, which blast billions of tons of matter
into space. You can see visible reminders of the protection you receive from

Magnetosphere: NASA/Steele Hill; earth tilt: Based on NASA/Visible Earth imagery

compared with other moons in our solar
system, our moon is unusually large in
relation to its host planet. Mere coincidence? It seems unlikely.
For one thing, the moon is the principal cause of ocean tides, which play a vital role in earth’s ecology. The moon also
contributes to the planet’s stable spin
axis. Without its tailor-made moon, our
planet would wobble like a spinning top,
perhaps even tipping right over and turning on its side, as it were! The resulting
climatic, tidal, and other changes would
be catastrophic.
Earth’s perfect tilt and spin: Earth’s
tilt of about 23.4 degrees causes the annual cycle of seasons, moderates temperatures, and allows for a wide range
of climate zones. “Our planet’s tilt axis
seems to be ‘just right,’ ” says the book
Rare Earth—Why Complex Life Is
Uncommon in the Universe.3
Also “just right” is the
length of day and night, a
result of earth’s spin. If the
speed of rotation were substantially slower, the days
would be longer and the side
of the earth facing the sun
would bake while the other side
would freeze. Conversely, if the earth
were to spin much faster, the days would
be shorter, perhaps just a few hours long,
and earth’s rapid spin would cause relentless gale-force winds and other harmful
e?ects.

The earth’s invisible
magnetic shield

Aurora: Photo: Jan Curtis (http://latitude64photos.com); meteorite: ESA, NASA

the earth’s magnetic ?eld. Solar ?ares
and explosions in the sun’s corona trigger intense auroras, colorful displays of
light visible in the upper atmosphere near
earth’s magnetic poles.
Earth’s atmosphere: This blanket of
gases not only keeps us breathing but
also provides additional protection. An
outer layer of the atmosphere, the stratosphere, contains a form of oxygen called
ozone, which absorbs up to 99 percent
of incoming ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
Thus, the ozone layer helps to protect
many forms of life—including humans
and the plankton we depend on to produce much of our oxygen—from dangerous radiation. The amount of stratospheric ozone is not ?xed. Rather, it changes,
growing as the intensity of UV radiation
rises. So the ozone layer is a dynamic, ef?cient shield.
The atmosphere also protects us from
a daily barrage of debris from space—millions of objects ranging in size from tiny
particles to boulders. By far the majority
of these burn up in the atmosphere, be-

Aurora borealis

coming bright ?ashes of light called meteors. However, earth’s shields do not
block radiation that is essential to life,
such as heat and visible light. The atmosphere even helps to distribute the heat
around the globe, and at night the atmosphere acts as a blanket, slowing the escape of heat.
Earth’s atmosphere and magnetic ?eld
truly are marvels of design that are still
not fully understood. The same could be
said of the cycles that sustain life on this
planet.

The atmosphere
protects us from
meteors

Is it only a coincidence
that our planet is
protected by two
dynamic shields?

Natural cycles for life
If a city’s supply of fresh air and water were
cut and its sewers blocked, disease and death
would soon follow. But consider: Our planet is
not like a restaurant, where new food and supplies
are shipped in from outside and garbage is carted
away. The clean air and water we depend on are
not shipped in from outer space, nor is waste matter rocketed out. So how does the earth remain
healthy and habitable? The answer: the natural cycles, such as water, carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen
cycles, explained here and shown simpli?ed.

The water cycle: Water is essential to life.
None of us can live without it for more than
a few days. The water cycle distributes fresh,
clean water around the planet. It involves
three stages. (1) Solar power lifts water into
the atmosphere by evaporation. (2) Condensation of this puri?ed water produces clouds.
(3) Clouds, in turn, form rain, hail, sleet, or
snow, which falls to the ground, ready to evaporate again, thus completing the cycle. How much
water is recycled annually? According to estimates, enough to cover the earth’s surface uniformly to a depth of more than two and a half
feet.4

2

3
1

The carbon and oxygen cycles: As you know,
2

Oxygen

Carbon
dioxide

8

WAS LIFE CREATED?

1

in order to live you need to breathe, to take in
oxygen and give out carbon dioxide. But with
countless billions of humans and animals doing
the same thing, why does our atmosphere never
run out of oxygen and become overloaded with
carbon dioxide? The answer lies in the oxygen
cycle. (1) In an amazing process called photosynthesis, plants take in the carbon dioxide that
we exhale, using it and the energy from sunlight
to produce carbohydrates and oxygen. (2) When
we take in oxygen, we complete that cycle. All
this production of vegetation and breathable air
happens cleanly, e?ciently, and quietly.

Earth’s atmosphere is
78 percent nitrogen

Organic
molecules

A
B

C

Nitrogen compounds

Bacteria

Bacteria

The nitrogen cycle: Life on earth also depends on the production of such organic
molecules as proteins. (A) To produce those molecules, nitrogen is needed. Happily, that
gas makes up about 78 percent of our atmosphere. Lightning converts nitrogen into
compounds that plants can absorb. (B) Then plants incorporate those compounds into
organic molecules. Animals that eat those plants thus also acquire nitrogen. (C) Finally,
when plants and animals die, the nitrogen compounds in them are broken down by
bacteria. That process of decay releases nitrogen back into the soil and atmosphere,
completing the cycle.

Humans, with all their advanced technology, create countless tons of unrecyclable toxic waste annually. Yet, the earth
recycles all its wastes perfectly, using ingenious chemical engineering.
How do you think the earth’s recycling
systems arose? “If the Earth’s ecosystem had truly evolved by chance alone, it
wouldn’t possibly have been able to reach
such a perfect level of environmental harmony,” says religion and science writer
M. A. Corey.5 Do you agree with his conclusion?

Stockbyte/Getty Images

Perfect recycling!

How would you reply?
?

Do you feel that the earth’s features
are the product of purposeful
design? If so, which of the above
facts do you ?nd most convincing?

?

How would you respond to the claim
that the earth is nothing special,
just another setting where evolution
could occur?

THE LIVING PLANET

9

Teeming with life
No one knows how many species
there are on earth. Estimates vary
from 2 million to 100 million.6 How
pervasive is life on our planet?

Earth: Just one hundred grams
(3.5 ounces) of soil has been found
to host 10,000 species of bacteria,7
not to mention the total number of
microbes. Some species have been
found almost two miles underground!8

Air: In addition to the birds, bats, and
Subterranean
bacteria

insects that ?y through the air, the atmosphere is ?lled with pollen and
other spores, as well as seeds and
—in certain areas—thousands of di?erent kinds of microbes. The diversity of
microbial life in the air is “on par with
the diversity of microbes in the soil,”
says Scientific American magazine.9

Water: The oceans remain largely a
Pollen

Anemone

mystery because in order to study
the watery deep, scientists often have
to use costly technology. Even coral
reefs, which are relatively accessible
and are well-surveyed, may host millions of yet unknown species.
Did this impressive variety of life arise
by chance? Many would agree with
the poet who wrote: “How many your
works are, O Jehovah! All of them in
wisdom you have made. The earth is
full of your productions.”1—Psalm
104:24.
1 In the Bible, God’s personal name is
Jehovah.—Psalm 83:18.

10

WAS LIFE CREATED?

Bacteria: Penn State University, laboratory of Jean Brenchley, and with kind
permission from Springer ScienceBusiness Media: Extremophiles, Novel
ultramicrobacterial isolates from a deep Greenland ice core represent a proposed new species, Chryseobacterium greenlandense sp. nov., January 2010,
Jennifer Loveland-Curtze; pollen: 5 Fotosearch

Who designed it
first?

In recent years, scientists and engineers have,
in a very real sense, allowed plants and animals to instruct them. (Job 12:7, 8) They are
studying and mimicking the design features
of various creatures—a ?eld known as biomimetics—in an e?ort to create new products
and improve the performance of existing ones.
As you consider the following examples, ask
yourself, ‘Who really deserves the credit
for these designs?’

11

Learning from the whale’s
flippers
What can aircraft designers learn from
the humpback whale? A great deal, it
seems. An adult humpback weighs about
30 tons—as much as a loaded truck—and
has a relatively sti? body with large winglike ?ippers. This 40-foot-long animal is
remarkably agile under water.
What particularly intrigued researchers was how this sti?-bodied creature
could turn in what seem to be impossibly tight circles. They discovered that the
secret is in the shape of the whale’s ?ippers. The leading edge of its ?ippers is
not smooth, like an aircraft wing, but serrated, with a row of protruding bumps
called tubercles.
As the whale slices through the water,
these tubercles increase lift and reduce
drag. How? The journal Natural History
explains that the tubercles make the water accelerate over the ?ipper in an organized, rotating ?ow, even when the whale
is rising at very steep angles.10
What practical applications does this
discovery promise? Aircraft wings
based on the design would evidently need fewer wing ?aps

12

WAS LIFE CREATED?

or other mechanical devices to alter air?ow. Such wings would be safer and easier to maintain. Biomechanics expert
John Long believes that someday soon
“we may well see every single jetliner
with the bumps of humpback whale ?ippers.”11

Mimicking the seagull’s wings
Of course, aircraft wings already mimic the shape of birds’ wings. However, engineers have recently taken this mimicry
to new heights. “Researchers at the University of Florida,” reports New Scientist,
“have built a prototype remote-controlled
drone with a seagull’s ability to hover,
dive and climb rapidly.”12
Seagulls perform their remarkable
aerobatic maneuvers by ?exing their
wings at the elbow and shoulder joints.
Copying this ?exible wing design, “the

24-inch prototype drone uses a small
motor to control a series of metal rods
that move the wings,” says the magazine.
These cleverly engineered wings enable
the small aircraft to hover and dive between tall buildings. Some military personnel are keen to develop such a highly
maneuverable craft for use in searching
for chemical or biological weapons in big
cities.
A seagull does not freeze, even while
standing on ice. How does this creature
conserve its body heat? Part of the secret
is in a fascinating design feature found in
a number of animals that dwell in cold regions. It is called the countercurrent heat
exchanger.
What is a countercurrent heat exchanger? To understand it, picture two
water pipes strapped closely together.
Hot water ?ows in one pipe, and cold,
in the other. If both the hot water and
the cold water ?ow down the pipes in the
same direction, about half of

5 Fotosearch

Copying the seagull’s leg

Heat transfers,
remains in the
body
Cold stays
in the feet

Plane: Kristen Bartlett/University of Florida

the heat from the hot water will transfer to the cold. However, if the hot water
and the cold water ?ow in opposite directions, nearly all the heat will transfer
from the hot water to the cold.
When a seagull stands on ice, the heat
exchangers in its legs warm the blood as
it returns from the bird’s cold feet. The
heat exchangers conserve heat in the
bird’s body and prevent heat loss from its
feet. Arthur P. Fraas, a mechanical and
aeronautical engineer, described this design as “one of the world’s most e?ective
regenerative heat exchangers.”13 This design is so ingenious that human engineers
have copied it.

A concept car imitates
the surprisingly low-drag
and stable design of the
boxfish

Sonar in dolphins is superior
to the human imitation

Meanwhile, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration is developing
a multilegged robot that walks like a scorpion, and engineers in Finland have already developed a six-legged tractor that
can climb over obstacles the way a giant
insect would. Other researchers have designed fabric with small ?aps that imitate the way pinecones open and close.
Who is nature’s patent holder?

Such fabric adjusts to the body temperature of the wearer. A car manufacturer
is developing a vehicle that imitates the
surprisingly low-drag design of the box?sh. And other researchers are probing
the shock-absorbing properties of abalone shells, with the intention of making
lighter, stronger body armor.
So many good ideas have come from
nature that researchers have established
a database that already catalogs thou14

WAS LIFE CREATED?

sands of di?erent biological systems.
Scientists can search this database to ?nd
“natural solutions to their design problems,” says The Economist. The natural
systems held in this database are known
as biological patents. Normally, a patent holder is a person or a company
that legally registers a new idea or machine. Discussing this biological patent
database, The Economist says: “By calling
biomimetic tricks ‘biological patents’, the
researchers are just emphasising that nature is, in e?ect, the patent holder.”14
How did nature come up with all these
brilliant ideas? Many researchers would
attribute the seemingly ingenious designs
evident in nature to millions of years of
evolutionary trial and error. Other researchers, though, arrive at a di?erent
conclusion. Microbiologist Michael J.
Behe wrote in The New York Times of
February 7, 2005: “The strong appearance of design [in nature] allows a disarmingly simple argument: if it looks,
walks and quacks like a duck, then, absent compelling evidence to the con-

Box?sh and car: Mercedes-Benz USA

Who deserves the credit?

Scientists are researching the
shock-absorbing properties
of abalone shells

Gecko foot: 5 Fotosearch; hummingbird: Laurie Excell/Fogstock/age fotostock

trary, we have warrant to conclude it’s a
duck.” His opinion? “Design should not
be overlooked simply because it’s so obvious.”15
Surely, the engineer who designs a
safer, more e?cient aircraft wing would
deserve to receive credit for his or her design. Likewise, the inventor who devises
a more comfortable clothing material or
a more e?cient motor vehicle deserves
credit for his or her design. In fact, a manufacturer who copies someone else’s design but fails to acknowledge or credit the
designer may be viewed as a criminal.
Now consider these facts: Highly
trained researchers crudely mimic systems in nature to solve di?cult engineering problems. Yet, some would attribute
the genius of devising the original idea to
unintelligent evolution. Does that sound
reasonable to you? If the copy requires
an intelligent designer, what about the
original? Really, who deserves more credit, the master engineer or the apprentice
who imitates his designs?

The gecko can cling to the
smoothest of surfaces by
using molecular forces

A logical conclusion
After reviewing evidence of design
in nature, many people echo the sentiments of the Bible writer Paul, who said:
“[God’s] invisible qualities are clearly
seen from the world’s creation onward,
because they are perceived by the things
made, even his eternal power and Godship.”—Romans 1:19, 20.

How would you reply?
?

Does it seem logical
to you to believe
that the brilliant
engineering evident
in nature came about
by accident?
? How would you
answer the claim
that life only appears
to be designed?

WHO DESIGNED IT FIRST?

15

Was it designed?
If the copy requires a designer, what about the original?

Fibers
?

Man-made product: Kevlar is a tough
man-made ?ber used in such items
as bulletproof vests. To manufacture
Kevlar, high temperatures and
hazardous solvents are required.

?

Natural product: Orb-weaving spiders
produce seven types of silk. The
sturdiest, known as dragline silk, is
lighter than cotton yet, ounce for
ounce, is stronger than steel and
tougher than Kevlar. If enlarged to the
size of a football ?eld, a web of
dragline silk 0.4 inch thick with strands
1.6 inches apart could stop a jumbo jet
in ?ight! Spiders produce dragline silk
at room temperature, using water as a
solvent.

Microscopic view of spider
silk being secreted
Copyright Dennis Kunkel Microscopy, Inc.

16

WAS LIFE CREATED?

Navigation
?

Man-made product: Some commercial
airliners have computerized autopilot systems that
can not only guide a plane from one country to
another but also land the plane. The computer used
in one experimental autopilot system is about the
size of a credit card.

?

Natural product: Using a brain the size of the tip of
a ballpoint pen, the monarch butter?y migrates up to
1,800 miles from Canada to a small patch of forest
in Mexico. This butter?y relies on the sun to help it
navigate, and it has the ability to compensate for the
movement of the sun across the sky.

Lenses
?

Man-made product: Engineers
have developed an arti?cial compound
eye that ?ts 8,500 lenses into a space
the size of a pinhead. Such lenses could
be used in high-speed motion detectors and
ultrathin multidirectional cameras.

?

Natural product: Each eye of a dragon?y is made
up of some 30,000 lenses. These lenses produce
images that combine to create a wide mosaic view.
The compound eyes of the dragon?y are superb at
detecting movement.

WHO DESIGNED IT FIRST?

17

Evolution

myths and facts

“Evolution is as much a fact as the heat of the sun,” asserts Professor Richard
Dawkins, a prominent evolutionary scientist.16 Of course, experiments and direct
observations prove that the sun is hot. But do experiments and direct observations
provide the teaching of evolution with the same undisputed support?

Charles Darwin
and his book
Origin of Species

hair than their forebears.1 Some scientists attach to such slight changes the
term “microevolution.”
However, evolutionists teach that
small changes accumulated slowly over
billions of years and produced the big
changes needed to make ?sh into amphibians and apelike creatures into men.
These proposed big changes are de?ned
as “macroevolution.”
Charles Darwin, for example, taught
that the small changes we can observe
1 The changes dog breeders can produce often result from losses in gene function. For example, the
dachshund’s small size is caused by a failure of normal development of cartilage, resulting in dwar?sm.

Darwin: From the book Origin of Species, 1902; book: AbeBooks.com

Before answering that question, we
need to clear up something. Many scientists have noted that over time, the descendants of living things may change
slightly. For example, humans can selectively breed dogs so that eventually the
descendants have shorter legs or longer

implied that much bigger changes—which
no one has observed—are also possible.17
He felt that over vast periods of time,
some original, so-called simple life-forms
slowly evolved—by means of “extremely
slight modi?cations”—into the millions of
di?erent forms of life on earth.18
To many, this claim sounds reasonable. They wonder, ‘If small changes
can occur within a species, why should
not evolution produce big changes over
long periods of time?’1 In reality, though,
the teaching of evolution rests on three
myths. Consider the following.
Myth 1. Mutations provide the raw
materials needed to create new species. The teaching of macroevolution is built on the claim that mutations
—random changes in the genetic code
of plants and animals—can produce not
only new species but also entirely new
families of plants and animals.19
The facts. Many characteristics of a
plant or an animal are determined by
the instructions contained in its genetic
code, the blueprints that are wrapped up
in the nucleus of each cell.2 Researchers have discovered that mutations can
produce alterations in the descendants
of plants and animals. But do mutations
really produce entirely new species?
What has a century of study in the ?eld
of genetic research revealed?
In the late 1930’s, scientists enthusiastically embraced a new idea. They already thought that natural selection—the
process in which the organism best suit-

ed to its environment is most likely to survive and breed—could produce new species of plants from random mutations.
Therefore, they now assumed that arti?cial, or human-guided, selection of mutations should be able to do the same
thing but more e?ciently. “Euphoria
spread among biologists in general and
geneticists and breeders in particular,”
said Wolf-Ekkehard L önnig, a scientist from the Max Planck Institute for
Plant Breeding Research in Germany.1
Why the euphoria? L önnig, who has
spent some 30 years studying mutation
genetics in plants, said: “These researchers thought that the time had come to
revolutionize the traditional method
1 Lnnnig believes that life was created. His comments in this publication are his own and do not represent the opinion of the Max Planck Institute for
Plant Breeding Research.

Mutant fruit flies, though
malformed, are still fruit flies

Mutations can introduce changes
in plants—such as this mutant with
large flowers—but only within limits
Normal

1 While the word “species” is used frequently in
this section, it should be noted that this term is not
found in the Bible book of Genesis. There we ?nd the
term “kind,” which is much broader in meaning. Often, what scientists choose to call the evolution of a
new species is simply a matter of variation within a
“kind,” as the word is used in the Genesis account.
2 Research shows that the cell’s cytoplasm, its
membranes, and other structures also play a role in
shaping an organism.

EVOLUTION—MYTHS AND FACTS

19

Normal

of breeding plants and animals. They
thought that by inducing and selecting
favorable mutations, they could produce
new and better plants and animals.”20 In
fact, some hoped to produce entirely new
species.
Scientists in the United States, Asia,
and Europe launched well-funded research programs using methods that
promised to speed up evolution. After
more than 40 years of intensive research,
what were the results? “In spite of an
enormous ?nancial expenditure,” says researcher Peter von Sengbusch, “the attempt to cultivate increasingly productive varieties by irradiation [to cause
mutations], widely proved to be a failure.”21 And Lönnig said: “By the 1980’s,
the hopes and euphoria among scientists
had ended in worldwide failure. Mutation
breeding as a separate branch of research
was abandoned in Western countries. Almost all the mutants . . . died or were
weaker than wild varieties.”1
Even so, the data now gathered from
some 100 years of mutation research in
general and 70 years of mutation breeding in particular enable scientists to draw
conclusions regarding the ability of mutations to produce new species. After examining the evidence, Lönnig concluded:
“Mutations cannot transform an original
species [of plant or animal] into an entirely new one. This conclusion agrees
with all the experiences and results of
mutation research of the 20th century
taken together as well as with the laws of
probability.”
1 Mutation experiments repeatedly found that the
number of new mutants steadily declined, while the
same type of mutants regularly appeared. In addition,
less than 1 percent of plant mutations were chosen for
further research, and less than 1 percent of this group
were found suitable for commercial use. However, not
one entirely new species was ever created. The results
of mutation breeding in animals were even worse than
in plants, and the method was abandoned entirely.

20

WAS LIFE CREATED?

So, can mutations cause one species
to evolve into a completely new kind of
creature? The evidence answers no! Lönnig’s research has led him to the conclusion that “properly de?ned species have
real boundaries that cannot be abolished or transgressed by accidental mutations.”22
Consider the implications of the above
facts. If highly trained scientists are unable to produce new species by arti?cially inducing and selecting favorable mutations, is it likely that an unintelligent
process would do a better job? If research
shows that mutations cannot transform
an original species into an entirely new
one, then how, exactly, was macroevolution supposed to have taken place?
Myth 2. Natural selection led to the
creation of new species. Darwin believed that what he called natural selection would favor those life-forms best
suited to the environment, whereas less
suitable life-forms would eventually die
o?. Modern evolutionists teach that as
species spread and became isolated, natural selection chose the ones with gene
mutations that made them capable of surviving in their new environment. As a result, evolutionists speculate, these isolated groups eventually developed into
totally new species.
The facts. As previously noted, the evidence from research strongly indicates
that mutations cannot produce entirely
new kinds of plants or animals. Nevertheless, what proof do evolutionists provide
to support the claim that natural selection chooses bene?cial mutations to produce new species? A brochure published
in 1999 by the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) in the United States refers to “the 13 species of ?nches studied
by Darwin on the Gal ápagos Islands,
now known as Darwin’s ?nches.”23

At best, Darwin’s finches show
that a species can adapt to
changing climates

di?erent “species” of ?nches were interbreeding and producing o?spring that
survived better than the parents. They
concluded that if the interbreeding continued, it could result in the fusion of two
“species” into just one.25
So, does natural selection really create
entirely new species? Decades ago, evolutionary biologist George Christopher
Williams began questioning whether natural selection had such power.26 In 1999,
evolutionary theorist Je?rey H. Schwartz
wrote that natural selection may be helping species adapt to the changing demands of existence, but it is not creating
anything new.27
Indeed, Darwin’s ?nches are not becoming “anything new.” They are still
?nches. And the fact that they are interbreeding casts doubt on the methods
some evolutionists use to de?ne a species. In addition, information about these
birds exposes the fact that even prestigious scienti?c academies are not above
reporting evidence in a biased manner.
EVOLUTION—MYTHS AND FACTS

21

Beak drawings: From the book Journal of Researches, by Charles
Darwin (1873), image courtesy Biodiversity Heritage Library

In the 1970’s, a research group led
by Peter R. and B. Rosemary Grant of
Princeton University began studying
these ?nches and discovered that after
a year of drought on the islands, ?nches that had slightly bigger beaks
survived more readily than those with
smaller beaks. Since observing the size
and shape of the beaks is one of the primary ways of determining the 13 species of ?nches, these ?ndings were assumed to be signi?cant. “The Grants
have estimated,” continues the NAS brochure, “that if droughts occur about once
every 10 years on the islands, a new species of ?nch might arise in only about
200 years.”24
However, the NAS brochure neglects
to mention that in the years following the
drought, ?nches with smaller beaks again
dominated the population. The researchers found that as the climatic conditions
on the island changed, ?nches with longer beaks were dominant one year, but
later those with smaller beaks were dominant. They also noticed that some of the

Myth 3. The fossil record documents
macroevolutionary changes. The previously mentioned NAS brochure leaves
the reader with the impression that the
fossils found by scientists more than adequately document macroevolution. It declares: “So many intermediate forms
have been discovered between ?sh and
amphibians, between amphibians and
reptiles, between reptiles and mammals,
and along the primate lines of descent
that it often is di?cult to identify categorically when the transition occurs from
one to another particular species.”28
The facts. The con?dent statement
made by the NAS brochure is quite surprising. Why? Niles Eldredge, a staunch
evolutionist, states that the fossil record
According to the fossil record, all the major
groups of animals appeared suddenly and
remained virtually unchanged

Belief in evolution
—an act of “faith”
Why do many prominent evolutionists
1 Even the few examples from the fossil record that
researchers point to as proof of evolution are open to
debate. See pages 22 to 29 of the brochure, The Origin
of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

22

WAS LIFE CREATED?

1 “Materialism,” in this sense, refers to a theory
that everything in the universe, including all life, came
into existence without any supernatural intervention
in the process.

5 Juan Carlos Mu ñoz/age fotostock, and courtesy
of Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology

shows, not that there is a gradual accumulation of change, but that for long periods of time, “little or no evolutionary
change accumulates in most species.”129
To date, scientists worldwide have
unearthed and cataloged some 200 million large fossils and billions of small fossils. Many researchers agree that this vast
and detailed record shows that all the major groups of animals appeared suddenly
and remained virtually unchanged, with
many species disappearing as suddenly
as they arrived.

insist that macroevolution is a fact? Richard Lewontin, an in?uential evolutionist, candidly wrote that many scientists
are willing to accept unproven scienti?c claims because they “have a prior
commitment, a commitment to materialism.”1 Many scientists refuse even to
consider the possibility of an intelligent
Designer because, as Lewontin writes,
“we cannot allow a Divine Foot in the
door.”30
In this regard, sociologist Rodney
Stark is quoted in Scientific American as
saying: “There’s been 200 years of marketing that if you want to be a scientific person you’ve got to keep your
mind free of the fetters of religion.” He
further notes that in research universities,
“the religious people keep their mouths
shut.”31
If you are to accept the teaching of
macroevolution as true, you must believe
that agnostic or atheistic scientists will
not let their personal beliefs in?uence
their interpretations of scienti?c ?ndings.
You must believe that mutations and natural selection produced all complex lifeforms, despite a century of research that
shows that mutations have not transformed even one properly de?ned species into something entirely new. You
must believe that all creatures gradually evolved from a common ancestor, despite a fossil record that strongly indicates that the major kinds of plants and
animals appeared abruptly and did not
evolve into other kinds, even over aeons
of time. Does that type of belief sound as
though it is based on facts or on myths?
Really, belief in evolution is an act of
“faith.”

How would you reply?
?

How would you respond to the
claim that proof of so-called
microevolution is evidence
that macroevolution must
have taken place?

?

Why is it signi?cant that
the fossil record shows
that the majority of species
changed very little over vast
periods of time?

Science and the
Genesis account
Many people claim that science disproves the Bible’s account of creation.
However, the real contradiction is, not between science and the Bible, but
between science and the opinions of Christian Fundamentalists. Some of
these groups falsely assert that according to the Bible, all physical creation
was produced in six 24-hour days approximately 10,000 years ago.
The Bible, however, does not support such a conclusion. If it did, then many
scienti?c discoveries over the past one hundred years would indeed discredit
the Bible. A careful study of the Bible text reveals no con?ict with established scienti?c facts. For that reason, Jehovah’s Witnesses disagree with
Christian Fundamentalists and many creationists. The following shows what
the Bible really teaches.

When was “the beginning”?

24

WAS LIFE CREATED?

How long were
the creative days?
What about the length of the creative
days? Were they literally 24 hours long?
Some claim that because Moses—the
writer of Genesis—later referred to the
day that followed the six creative days
as a model for the weekly Sabbath, each
of the creative days must be literally 24
hours long. (Exodus 20:11) Does the
wording of Genesis support this conclusion?
No, it does not. The fact is that the
Hebrew word translated “day” can mean
various lengths of time, not just a 24-hour

Nebula: IAC/RGO/David Malin Images

The Genesis account opens with the
simple, powerful statement: “In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth.” (Genesis 1:1) A number of
Bible scholars agree that this statement
describes an action separate from the
creative days recounted from verse 3 onward. The implication is profound. According to the Bible’s opening words, the
universe, including our planet, Earth, was
in existence for an inde?nite time before
the creative days began.
Geologists estimate that the earth
is 4 billion years old, and astronomers
calculate that the universe may be as
much as 15 billion years old. Do these
?ndings—or their potential future re?nements—contradict Genesis 1:1? No. The

Bible does not specify the actual age of
“the heavens and the earth.” Science is
not at odds with the Biblical text.

Genesis does not teach
that the earth and the
universe were created in
six 24-hour days just a few
thousand years ago

Events starting during one “day” continued into
one or more of the following “days”

period. For example, when summarizing
God’s creative work, Moses refers to all
six creative days as one day. (Genesis
2:4) In addition, on the ?rst creative day,
“God began calling the light Day, but the
darkness he called Night.” (Genesis 1:5)
Here, only a portion of a 24-hour period
is de?ned by the term “day.” Certainly,
there is no basis in Scripture for arbitrarily stating that each creative day was 24
hours long.
How long, then, were the creative
days? The Bible does not say; however,
the wording of Genesis chapters 1 and 2
indicates that considerable lengths of
time were involved.

Six creative periods
Moses wrote his account in Hebrew,
and he wrote it from the perspective of
a person standing on the surface of the
earth. These two facts combined with the
knowledge that the universe existed before the beginning of the creative periods, or days, help to defuse much of the
controversy surrounding the creation account. How so?
26

WAS LIFE CREATED?

A careful consideration of the Genesis
account reveals that events starting during one “day” continued into one or more
of the following “days.” For example, before the ?rst creative “day” started, light
from the already existing sun was somehow prevented from reaching the earth’s
surface, possibly by thick clouds. (Job
38:9) During the ?rst “day,” this barrier
began to clear, allowing di?used light to
penetrate the atmosphere.1
On the second “day,” the atmosphere
evidently continued to clear, creating a
space between the thick clouds above
and the ocean below. On the fourth
“day,” the atmosphere gradually cleared
to such an extent that the sun and the
moon were made to appear “in the expanse of the heavens.” (Genesis 1:14-16)
In other words, from the perspective of a
person on earth, the sun and moon began
to be discernible. These events happened
gradually.
1 In the description of what happened on the ?rst
“day,” the Hebrew word used for light is ’ohr, light in
a general sense, but concerning the fourth “day,” the
word used is ma·’ohr, which refers to the source of
light.

The Genesis account also relates that
as the atmosphere continued to clear,
?ying creatures—including insects and
membrane-winged creatures—started to
appear on the ?fth “day.”
The Bible’s narrative allows for the
possibility that some major events during each day, or creative period, occurred
gradually rather than instantly, perhaps
some of them even lasting into the following creative days.1

According to their kinds
Does this progressive appearance of
plants and animals imply that God used
evolution to produce the vast diversity
of living things? No. The record clearly states that God created all the basic
“kinds” of plant and animal life. (Genesis 1:11, 12, 20-25) Were these original “kinds” of plants and animals programmed with the ability to adapt to
changing environmental conditions?
What de?nes the boundary of a “kind”?
1 For example, during the sixth creative day, God
decreed that humans “become many and ?ll the
earth.” (Genesis 1:28, 31) Yet, this event did not even
begin to occur until the following “day.”—Genesis 2:2.

The Bible does not say. However, it does state that living
creatures “swarmed forth according to their kinds.” (Genesis 1:21) This statement implies that there is a limit to the amount of
variation that can occur within a “kind.”
Both the fossil record and modern research support the idea that the fundamental categories of plants and animals
have changed little over vast periods of
time.
Contrary to the claims of some religious fundamentalists, Genesis does not
teach that the universe, including the

How would you reply?
?

What are some common misconceptions
about the Bible’s account of creation?

?

Why is it remarkable that the Bible and
science agree on many points?

earth and all living things on it, was created in a short period of time in the relatively recent past. Rather, aspects of the
description in Genesis of the creation of
the universe and the appearance of life
on earth harmonize with recent scienti?c
discoveries.
Because of their philosophical beliefs,
many scientists reject the Bible’s declaration that God created all things. Interestingly, however, in the ancient Bible
book of Genesis, Moses wrote that the
universe had a beginning and that life
appeared in stages, progressively, over
periods of time. How could Moses gain
access to such scienti?cally accurate information some 3,500 years ago? There
is one logical explanation. The One with
the power and wisdom to create the
heavens and the earth could certainly give Moses such advanced knowledge.
This gives weight to the Bible’s claim
that it is “inspired of God.”1—2 Timothy
3:16.
You may wonder, though, does it really matter whether you believe the Bible’s account of creation? Consider some
compelling reasons why the answer does
matter.
1 For more information, watch the brief video How
Can We Be Sure the Bible Is True? available on jw.org.

28

WAS LIFE CREATED?

Penguins: By courtesy of John R. Peiniger

Modern research
confirms that all living
things reproduce
“according to their
kinds”

Does it matter
what you believe?
Do you think that life has a purpose? Evolutionist William B. Provine says: “What we have learned about the
evolutionary process has enormous implications for us,
a?ecting our sense of meaning in life.” His conclusion?
“I can see no cosmic or ultimate meaning in human life.”32

& Faunia, Madrid

Consider the signi?cance of those
words. If ultimate meaning in life were
nonexistent, then you would have no purpose in living other than to try to do some
measure of good and perhaps pass on
your genetic traits to the next generation.
At death, you would cease to exist forever. Your brain, with its ability to think,
reason, and meditate on the meaning of
life, would simply be an accident of nature.
That is not all. Many who believe in
evolution assert that God does not exist
or that he will not intervene in human affairs. In either case, our future would rest
in the hands of political, academic, and
religious leaders. Judging from the past
record of such men, the chaos, con?ict,
and corruption that blight human society would continue. If, indeed, evolution
were true, there would seem to be ample
reason to live by the fatalistic motto: “Let
us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to
die.”—1 Corinthians 15:32.
By contrast, the Bible teaches: “With
[God] is the source of life.” (Psalm 36:9)
Those words have profound implications.

If what the Bible says is true, life does
have meaning. Our Creator has a loving
purpose that extends to all who choose to
live in accord with his will. (Ecclesiastes
12:13) That purpose includes the promise of life in a world free of chaos, con?ict, and corruption—and even free of
death.—Psalm 37:10, 11; Isaiah 25:6-8.
With good reason, millions of people
around the world believe that learning
about God and obeying him give meaning to life as nothing else can! (John
17:3) Such a belief is not based on mere
wishful thinking. The evidence is clear
—life was created.

How would you reply?
?

What are you inclined to
believe—that we evolved or
that we were created? Why
do you so answer?

?

What are some good
reasons for examining the
basis for your beliefs?

29

Bibliography
The Living Planet
1. Scientific American, Special Issue 2008 entitled “Majestic Universe,” p. 11.
2. Perfect Planet, Clever Species—How Unique
Are We? by William C. Burger, 2003, pp. 24, 34.
3. Rare Earth—Why Complex Life Is Uncommon
in the Universe, by Peter D. Ward and Donald
Brownlee, 2000, p. 224.
4. The Sacred Balance—Rediscovering Our Place
in Nature, by David Suzuki, 2007, p. 102.
5. God and the New Cosmology—The Anthropic
Design Argument, by M. A. Corey, 1993,
pp. 144-145.
Box: Teeming With Life
6. Wildlife in a Changing World—An
Analysis of the 2008 IUCN Red
List of Threatened Species, edited
by Jean-Christophe Vié, Craig
Hilton-Taylor, and Simon N. Stuart,
2009, p. 6.
7. Journal of Industrial Microbiology, “Total Bacterial Diversity in Soil and Sediment Communities—A Review,” by V. Torsvik,
R. Sørheim, and J. Goksøyr,
Volume 17, 1996, pp. 170178.
8. Science, “Environmental Genomics Reveals a Single-Species
Ecosystem Deep Within Earth,”
by Dylan Chivian, et al, Volume 322, October 10, 2008,
pp. 275-278.
5 David Hawks

9. Scientific American, “Microbe Census Reveals
Air Crawling With Bacteria,” by David Biello,
http://www.scienti?camerican.com/
article.cfm?id?microbe-census-reveals-ai.
Who Designed It First?
10. Natural History, “As the Whale Turns,” by
Adam Summers, June 2004, pp. 24-25.
11. Science, Random Samples, “Flippered
Flight,” May 21, 2004, p. 1106.
12. New Scientist, Technology, “Is It a Bird, Is It
a Plane . . . ,” September 3, 2005, p. 21.
13. Heat Exchanger Design, Second Edition,
by Arthur P. Fraas, 1989, p. 2.
30

WAS LIFE CREATED?

14. The Economist Technology Quarterly, Report,
“Technology That Imitates Nature,” June 11,
2005, pp. 18-22.
15. The New York Times, “Design for Living,”
by Michael J. Behe, February 7, 2005, p. A21.
Evolution—Myths and Facts
16. Natural History, “Darwin & Evolution—The
Illusion of Design,” by Richard Dawkins, November 2005, p. 37.
17. Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin, First
Edition, 1859, Sixth Edition, 1872, pp. 285-286.
18. Charles Darwin—The Origin of Species,
Introduction by Sir Julian Huxley, 1958 for Introduction, First Signet Classic Printing, September 2003, p. 458.
19. Nobel Lectures, Physiology or Medicine
1942-1962, 1999, “The Production of Mutations,” by H. J. Muller, 1946, p. 162.
20. Mutation Breeding, Evolution, and the
Law of Recurrent Variation, by Wolf-Ekkehard
Lönnig, “Expectations in Mutation Breeding,”
2005, p. 48, and interview with Wolf-Ekkehard
Lönnig.
21. Mutation Breeding, Evolution, and the Law
of Recurrent Variation, pp. 48-51.
22. Mutation Breeding, Evolution, and the Law
of Recurrent Variation, pp. 49, 50, 52, 54, 59,
64, and interview with Wolf-Ekkehard Lönnig.
23. Science and Creationism—A View From the
National Academy of Sciences, “Evidence Supporting Biological Evolution,” 1999, p. 10.
24. Science and Creationism—A View From the
National Academy of Sciences, “Evidence Supporting Biological Evolution,” p. 11.
25. Scientific American, “Natural Selection and
Darwin’s Finches,” by Peter R. Grant, October 1991, p. 87;
Nature, “Oscillating Selection on Darwin’s
Finches,” by H. Lisle Gibbs and Peter R. Grant,
June 11, 1987, p. 511;
Science, “Hybridization of Bird Species,” by Peter
R. Grant and B. Rosemary Grant, April 10, 1992,
pp. 193-197.
26. Adaption and Natural Selection, by George
C. Williams, 1966, p. 54.
27. Sudden Origins—Fossils, Genes, and the
Emergence of Species, by Je?rey H. Schwartz,
1999, pp. 317-320.

29. The Triumph of Evolution and the Failure
of Creationism, by Niles Eldredge, 2000,
pp. 49, 85.
30. The New York Review of Books, “Billions
and Billions of Demons,” by Richard C. Lewontin, January 9, 1997, pp. 28-32.
31. Scientific American, “Scientists and Religion in America,” by Edward J. Larson and Larry Witham, September 1999, p. 91.
Does It Matter What You Believe?
32. Science, Technology, and Social Progress,
edited by Steven L. Goldman, “Evolution and
the Foundation of Ethics,” by William B. Provine, 1989, pp. 253, 266.

w
r

NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage (STScl/AURA) -ESA/Hubble Collaboration

28. Science and Creationism—A View From
the National Academy of Sciences, Second
Edition, “Evidence Supporting Biological Evolution,” p. 14.

Is the Bible scienti?cally accurate?
Have its prophecies come true?
What is remarkable about its distribution?
To discover the answers, watch the four-and-a-half-minute video
How Can We Be Sure the Bible Is True? available on jw.org.

You can also find answers to the following questions:
What Does the
Bible Really Teach?

?

Why do we su?er?
? How can we make our family life happier?
?

What happens to us when we die?
The 224-page book What Does the Bible Really Teach?
answers those and many other questions.
You can download a free copy of this book from jw.org.

s

?

Was our planet designed for life?

?

What can we learn from the designs evident in nature?

?

Is the teaching of evolution based solidly on fact?

?

Has science disproved the Bible’s account of creation?

?

Why does it matter what you believe?

lc-E
161025

Was life created, or are you purely the product of random,
undirected events? Few questions create more controversy.
Yet, the answer is vitally important. This brochure considers
such questions as these:

