THE ORIGIN OF LIFE
FIVE QUESTIONS WORTH ASKING

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE
FIVE QUESTIONS WORTH ASKING

QUESTION

QUESTION

QUESTION

QUESTION

QUESTION

1
2
3
4
5

How Did Life Begin? PAGE 4

Is Any Form of Life Really Simple? PAGE 8

Where Did the Instructions Come From? PAGE 13

Has All Life Descended From a Common Ancestor? PAGE 22

Is It Reasonable to Believe the Bible? PAGE 30

Bibliography

PAGE 31

On the cover: A stylized depiction of a DNA molecule
Note: All three-dimensional models of molecules and of molecular
machines are simpli?ed schematics and are not drawn to scale.
5 2010
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
All Rights Reserved
Publishers
WATCHTOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, INC.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
2010 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures—With References
Photo credits: Page 4: 5 Petit Format/Photo Researchers, Inc.; page 5: 5 SPL/Photo
Researchers, Inc.; page 22, tree of life: Image courtesy of Biodiversity Heritage Library;
page 27, skull: 5 Photolibrary/age fotostock; Ida: 5 Martin Shields/Alamy; page 28, skulls:
5 Medical-on-Line/Alamy; page 29, Java Man reconstruction: 5 The Print Collector/Alamy
The Origin of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking
English (lf-E)
Made in the United States of America

A STUDENT’S DILEMMA
Peter shifts uneasily in his chair, a knot forming in his stomach. His teacher,
a woman he respects, has just ?nished describing how Charles Darwin and his
theory of evolution advanced scienti?c understanding and liberated mankind
from superstitious beliefs. Now she has invited her students to express their
opinions on this topic.
Peter faces a dilemma. His parents have taught him that God created the earth
and all life on it. They say that the Bible’s account of creation is trustworthy and
that evolution is simply a theory—one not supported by the evidence. Peter’s
teacher and his parents all mean well. But whom should Peter believe?

Each school year, scenarios like the
above play out in thousands of classrooms around the globe. What should
Peter and students like him do? Would
you not agree that they really need to
make up their own minds on this matter?
They need to examine the evidence for
evolution and for creation and then decide for themselves which they will believe.
In fact, the Bible warns against blindly believing what others teach. “Anyone
inexperienced puts faith in every word,”
states one Bible writer, “but the shrewd
one considers his steps.” (Proverbs 14:
15) The Bible encourages Christians to
use their “power of reason” and to prove
to themselves the things they are taught.
—Romans 12:1, 2.
This brochure is not designed to sup-

port the e?orts of religious groups who
want to have creation taught in schools.
The purpose of this brochure is to examine claims made by those who teach that
life appeared spontaneously and assert
that the Bible’s account of creation is a
myth.
We will focus on the cell because that
is the most basic unit of life. You will be
able to review some amazing facts about
how cells are built. You will also be asked
to analyze the assumptions that underpin
the theory of evolution.
Sooner or later, all of us need to confront the question, Was life created, or
did it evolve? You likely have already given this topic serious thought. This brochure will present just some of the evidence that has led many to believe that
life was created.
A STUDENT’S DILEMMA

3

1

HOW DID LIFE BEGIN?
When you were a child, did you ever startle your parents by asking, “Where do
babies come from?” If so, how did they respond? Depending on your age and
their personality, your parents might have ignored the question or given you a
hurried, embarrassed answer. Or perhaps they told you some fanciful tales that
you later found to be false. Of course, if a child is to be properly prepared for
adulthood and marriage, he or she eventually needs to learn about the wonders
of sexual reproduction.
Just as many parents feel awkward about discussing where babies come from,
some scientists seem reluctant to discuss an even more fundamental question
—Where did life come from? Receiving a credible answer to that question can
have a profound e?ect on a person’s outlook on life. So how did life begin?

A fertilized human egg cell, shown about
800 times its actual size

4

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

What do many scientists claim? Many
who believe in evolution would tell you
that billions of years ago, life began
on the edge of an ancient tidal pool or
deep in the ocean. They feel that in some
such location, chemicals spontaneously assembled into bubblelike structures,
formed complex molecules, and began
replicating. They believe that all life on
earth originated by accident from one or
more of these “simple” original cells.
Other equally respected scientists who
also support evolution disagree. They
speculate that the ?rst cells or at least
their major components arrived on earth
from outer space. Why? Because, despite
their best e?orts, scientists have been unable to prove that life can spring from
nonliving molecules. In 2008, Professor
of Biology Alexandre Meinesz highlighted the dilemma. He stated that over the
last 50 years, “no empirical evidence sup-

ports the hypotheses of the spontaneous
appearance of life on Earth from nothing
but a molecular soup, and no signi?cant
advance in scienti?c knowledge leads in
this direction.”1
What does the evidence reveal? The
answer to the question, Where do babies
come from? is well-documented and uncontroversial. Life always comes from
preexisting life. However, if we go back
far enough in time, is it really possible that
this fundamental law was broken? Could
life really spontaneously spring from nonliving chemicals? What are the chances
that such an event could happen?
Researchers have learned that for a
cell to survive, at least three di?erent
types of complex molecules must work
together—DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid),
RNA (ribonucleic acid), and proteins.
Today, few scientists would assert that a
complete living cell suddenly formed by
chance from a mix of inanimate chemicals. What, though, is the probability that
RNA or proteins could form by chance?1
Many scientists feel that life could
arise by chance because of an experiment
?rst conducted in 1953. In that year,
Stanley L. Miller was able to produce
some amino acids, the chemical building
blocks of proteins, by discharging electricity into a mixture of gases that was
thought to represent the atmosphere of
primitive earth. Since then, amino acids
have also been found in a meteorite. Do
these ?ndings mean that all the basic
building blocks of life could easily be produced by chance?
“Some writers,” says Robert Shapiro,
professor emeritus of chemistry at New
York University, “have presumed that all
life’s building blocks could be formed
1 The probability of DNA forming by chance will
be discussed in section 3, “Where Did the Instructions Come From?”

STANLEY MILLER, 1953

with ease in Miller-type experiments and
were present in meteorites. This is not the
case.”21
Consider the RNA molecule. It is constructed of smaller molecules called nucleotides. A nucleotide is a di?erent molecule from an amino acid and is only
slightly more complex. Shapiro says that
“no nucleotides of any kind have been reported as products of spark-discharge experiments or in studies of meteorites.”3
He further states that the probability of
a self-replicating RNA molecule randomly assembling from a pool of chemical
building blocks “is so vanishingly small
that its happening even once anywhere
in the visible universe would count as a
piece of exceptional good luck.”4
What about protein molecules? They
can be made from as few as 50 or as
many as several thousand amino acids
bound together in a highly speci?c order.
The average functional protein in a “simple” cell contains 200 amino acids. Even
1 Professor Shapiro does not believe that life was
created. He believes that life arose by chance in some
fashion not yet fully understood. In 2009, scientists at
the University of Manchester, England, reported making some nucleotides in their lab. However, Shapiro
states that their recipe “de?nitely does not meet my
criteria for a plausible pathway to the RNA world.”

1 HOW DID LIFE BEGIN?

5

1

RNA – is required to make proteins —, yet
proteins are involved in the production of RNA.
How could either one arise by chance, let alone
both? Ribosomes ˜ will be discussed in
section 2.

2

3

in those cells, there are thousands of different types of proteins. The probability
that just one protein containing only 100
amino acids could ever randomly form
on earth has been calculated to be about
one chance in a million billion.
Researcher Hubert P. Yockey, who
supports the teaching of evolution, goes
further. He says: “It is impossible that the
origin of life was ‘proteins ?rst.’ ”5 RNA
is required to make proteins, yet proteins
are involved in the production of RNA.
What if, despite the extremely small
odds, both proteins and RNA molecules
did appear by chance in the same place
at the same time? How likely would it
If the creation of complex molecules in the
laboratory requires the skill of a scientist,
could the far more complex molecules in
a cell really arise by chance?

be for them to cooperate to form a selfreplicating, self-sustaining type of life?
“The probability of this happening by
chance (given a random mixture of proteins and RNA) seems astronomically
low,” says Dr. Carol Cleland1, a member
of the National Aeronautics and Space
1 Dr. Cleland is not a creationist. She believes that
life arose by chance in some fashion not yet fully understood.

6

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

Administration’s Astrobiology Institute.
“Yet,” she continues, “most researchers
seem to assume that if they can make
sense of the independent production of
proteins and RNA under natural primordial conditions, the coordination will
somehow take care of itself.” Regarding
the current theories of how these building blocks of life could have arisen by
chance, she says: “None of them have
provided us with a very satisfying story
about how this happened.”6
Why do these facts matter? Think of
the challenge facing researchers who
feel that life arose by chance. They have
found some amino acids that also appear
in living cells. In their laboratories, they
have, by means of carefully designed and
directed experiments, manufactured other more complex molecules. Ultimately,
they hope to build all the parts needed
to construct a “simple” cell. Their situation could be likened to that of a scientist
who takes naturally occurring elements;
transforms them into steel, plastic, silicone, and wire; and constructs a robot.
He then programs the robot to be able to
build copies of itself. By doing so, what
will he prove? At best, that an intelligent
entity can create an impressive machine.
Similarly, if scientists ever did construct a cell, they would accomplish

something truly amazing—but would they
prove that the cell could be made by accident? If anything, they would prove the
very opposite, would they not?
What do you think? All scienti?c evidence to date indicates that life can come
only from previously existing life. To believe that even a “simple” living cell arose
by chance from nonliving chemicals requires a huge leap of faith.
Given the facts, are you willing to
make such a leap? Before answering that
question, take a closer look at the way a
cell is made. Doing so will help you discern whether the theories some scientists
propound about where life came from are
sound or are as fanciful as the tales some
parents tell about where babies come
from.

If it takes an intelligent entity to create and
program a lifeless robot, what would it take
to create a living cell, let alone a human?

FACTS AND QUESTIONS
?

Fact: All scienti?c research indicates that life
cannot spring from nonliving matter.
Question: What is the scientific basis for saying
that the first cell sprang from nonliving chemicals?

who performed the experiment represent? Does
he or she represent blind chance or an intelligent entity?

Fact: Researchers have recreated in the laboratory the environmental conditions that they
believe existed early in the earth’s history. In
these experiments, a few scientists have manufactured some of the molecules found in living
things.

? Fact: Protein and RNA molecules must work
together for a cell to survive. Scientists admit
that it is highly unlikely that RNA formed by
chance. The odds against even one protein forming by chance are astronomical. It is exceedingly improbable that RNA and proteins should form
by chance in the same place at the same time
and be able to work together.

Question: If the chemicals in the experiment
represent the earth’s early environment and the
molecules produced represent the building
blocks of life, whom or what does the scientist

Question: What takes greater faith—to believe
that the millions of intricately coordinated parts
of a cell arose by chance or to believe that the
cell is the product of an intelligent mind?

?

1 HOW DID LIFE BEGIN?

7

2

IS ANY FORM OF LIFE
REALLY SIMPLE?
BRAIN CELL

Your body is one of the most complex
structures in the universe. It is made up
of some 100 trillion tiny cells—bone cells,
blood cells, brain cells, to name a few.7
In fact, there are more than 200 di?erent
types of cells in your body.8
Despite their amazing diversity in shape
and function, your cells form an intricate,
integrated network. The Internet, with
its millions of computers and high-speed
data cables, is clumsy in comparison. No
human invention can compete with the
technical brilliance evident in even the
most basic of cells. How did the cells that
make up the human body come into
existence?
What do many scientists claim? All living cells fall into two major categories
—those with a nucleus and those without.
Human, animal, and plant cells have a
nucleus. Bacterial cells do not. Cells with
a nucleus are called eukaryotic. Those
without a nucleus are known as prokaryotic. Since prokaryotic cells are relatively
less complex than eukaryotic cells, many
believe that animal and plant cells must
have evolved from bacterial cells.
In fact, many teach that for millions
of years, some “simple” prokaryotic cells
swallowed other cells but did not digest
8

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

EYE CELLS

BONE CELL

MUSCLE CELLS

RED BLOOD CELLS

Could the more than 200 di?erent
kinds of cells that make up your
body really form by accident?

Could even a “simple” cell really arise
from nonliving chemicals?

them. Instead, the theory goes, unintelligent “nature” ?gured out a way not only
to make radical changes in the function
of the ingested cells but also to keep the
adapted cells inside of the “host” cell
when it replicated.91
What does the Bible say? The Bible
states that life on earth is the product
of an intelligent mind. Note the Bible’s
clear logic: “Of course, every house is
constructed by someone, but he that constructed all things is God.” (Hebrews
3:4) Another Bible passage says: “How
many your works are, O Jehovah! All
of them in wisdom you have made. The
earth is full of your productions. . . .
There are moving things without number,
living creatures, small as well as great.”
—Psalm 104:24, 25.
What does the evidence reveal? Advances in microbiology have made it possible to peer into the awe-inspiring interior of the simplest living prokaryotic cells
known. Evolutionary scientists theorize
that the ?rst living cells must have looked
something like these cells.10
If the theory of evolution is true, it
should o?er a plausible explanation of
how the ?rst “simple” cell formed by
chance. On the other hand, if life was
created, there should be evidence of
ingenious design even in the smallest
of creatures. Why not take a tour of a
prokaryotic cell? As you do so, ask yourself whether such a cell could arise by
chance.
1 No experimental evidence exists to show that
such an event is possible.

THE CELL’S PROTECTIVE WALL
To tour a prokaryotic cell, you would
have to shrink to a size that is hundreds
of times smaller than the period at the
end of this sentence. Keeping you out
of the cell is a tough, ?exible membrane
that acts like a brick and mortar wall surrounding a factory. It would take some
10,000 layers of this membrane to equal
the thickness of a sheet of paper. But the
membrane of a cell is much more sophisticated than the brick wall. In what ways?
Like the wall surrounding a factory,
the membrane of a cell shields the contents from a potentially hostile environment. However, the membrane is not
solid; it allows the cell to “breathe,” permitting small molecules, such as oxygen, to pass in or out. But the membrane
blocks more complex, potentially damaging molecules from entering without the
cell’s permission. The membrane also
prevents useful molecules from leaving
the cell. How does the membrane manage such feats?
Think again of a factory. It might have
security guards who monitor the products that enter and leave through the
doorways in the factory wall. Similarly,
the cell membrane has special protein
molecules embedded in it that act like the
doors and the security guards.
2 IS ANY FORM OF LIFE REALLY SIMPLE?

9

3
2

4

1

The cell membrane has
“security guards” that allow
only speci?c substances to
pass in or out

Some of these proteins (1) have a hole
through the middle of them that allows
only speci?c types of molecules in and
out of the cell. Other proteins are open
on one side of the cell membrane (2) and
closed on the other. They have a docking site (3) shaped to ?t a speci?c substance. When that substance docks, the
other end of the protein opens and releases the cargo through the membrane (4).
All this activity is happening on the surface of even the simplest of cells.
INSIDE THE FACTORY
Imagine that you have been allowed
past the “security guard” and are now inside the cell. The interior of a prokaryotic
cell is ?lled with a watery ?uid that is rich
in nutrients, salts, and other substances. The cell uses these raw ingredients to
manufacture the products it needs. But
the process is not haphazard. Like an ef?ciently run factory, the cell organizes
thousands of chemical reactions so that
they take place in a speci?c order and according to a set timetable.
A cell spends a lot of its time making
proteins. How does it do so? First, you
10

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

would see the cell make about 20 di?erent basic building blocks called amino
acids. These building blocks are delivered to the ribosomes (5), which may be
likened to automated machines that link
the amino acids in a precise order to
form a speci?c protein. Just as the operations of a factory might be governed
by a central computer program, many of
the functions of a cell are governed by a
“computer program,” or code, known as
DNA (6). From the DNA, the ribosome
receives a copy of detailed instructions
that tell it which protein to build and how
to build it (7).
What happens as the protein is made
is nothing short of amazing! Each one
folds into a unique three-dimensional
shape (8). It is this shape that determines
the specialized job that the protein will
do.1 Picture a production line where engine parts are being assembled. Each part
needs to be precisely constructed if the
1 Enzymes are one example of proteins made by
cells. Each enzyme is folded in a special way to accelerate a particular chemical reaction. Hundreds of enzymes cooperate to regulate the cell’s activities.

6

7
8

5

engine is to work. Similarly, if a protein is
not precisely constructed and folded to
exactly the right shape, it will not be able
to do its work properly and may even
damage the cell.
How does the protein ?nd its way from
where it was made to where it is needed?
Each protein the cell makes has a built-in
“address tag” that ensures that the protein will be delivered to where it is needed. Although thousands of proteins are
built and delivered each minute, each one
arrives at the correct destination.
Why do these facts matter? The complex molecules in the simplest living
thing cannot reproduce alone. Outside
the cell, they break down. Inside the
cell, they cannot reproduce without the
help of other complex molecules. For example, enzymes are needed to produce
a special energy molecule called adenosine triphosphate (ATP), but energy
from ATP is needed to produce enzymes.
Similarly, DNA (section 3 discusses this
molecule) is required to make enzymes,
but enzymes are required to make DNA.
Also, other proteins can be made only by

the cell “factory”
How Proteins Are Made
Like an automated factory, the cell
is full of machines that assemble
and deliver complex products

HOW FAST CAN A CELL REPRODUCE?
Some bacteria can make replicas of themselves within 20 minutes. Each cell copies all
the controlling “computer programs.” Then it
divides. If it had unlimited access to fuel, just
one cell could increase in number exponentially. At that rate, it would take only two days to
produce a clump of cells with a weight more
than 2,500 times greater than that of the
earth.15 Cells that are more complex can also
replicate quickly. For example, when you were
developing in your mother’s womb, new brain
cells formed at the astounding rate of 250,000
per minute!16
Human manufacturers often have to sacri?ce
quality to produce an item at a fast pace. How
is it possible, then, that cells can reproduce
so fast and so accurately if they are the product
of undirected accidents?

If this skyscraper must collapse because it has a ?imsy
foundation, must not the theory of evolution collapse
because it has no explanation for the origin of life?

a cell, but a cell can be made only with
proteins.1
Microbiologist Radu Popa does not
agree with the Bible’s account of cre1 Some of the cells in the human body are made up
of about 10,000,000,000 protein molecules11 of several hundred thousand di?erent kinds.12

FACTS AND QUESTIONS
? Fact: The extraordinarily complex molecules
that make up a cell—DNA, RNA, proteins—seem
designed to work together.

Question: What seems more likely to you? Did
unintelligent evolution construct the intricate
machines depicted on page 10, or were those
machines the product of an intelligent mind?
? Fact: Some respected scientists say that even
a “simple” cell is far too complex to have arisen
by chance on earth.

Question: If some scientists are willing to speculate that life came from an extraterrestrial source,
what is the basis for ruling out God as that
Source?

12

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

ation. Yet, in 2004 he asked: “How can
nature make life if we failed with all the
experimental conditions controlled?”13
He also stated: “The complexity of the
mechanisms required for the functioning
of a living cell is so large that a simultaneous emergence by chance seems impossible.”14
What do you think? The theory of evolution tries to account for the origin of life
on earth without the necessity of divine
intervention. However, the more that
scientists discover about life, the less likely it appears that it could arise by chance.
To sidestep this dilemma, some evolutionary scientists would like to make a
distinction between the theory of evolution and the question of the origin of life.
But does that sound reasonable to you?
The theory of evolution rests on the
notion that a long series of fortunate accidents produced life to start with. It then
proposes that another series of undirected accidents produced the astonishing diversity and complexity of all living things.
However, if the foundation of the theory
is missing, what happens to the other theories that are built on this assumption?
Just as a skyscraper built without a foundation would collapse, a theory of evolution that cannot explain the origin of life
will crumble.
After brie?y considering the structure
and function of a “simple” cell, what do
you see—evidence of many accidents or
proof of brilliant design? If you are still
unsure, take a closer look at the “master
program” that controls the functions of
all cells.

3

WHERE DID THE
INSTRUCTIONS COME FROM?
Why do you look the way you do? What determines the color of
your eyes, your hair, your skin? What about your height, your
build, or your resemblance to one or both of your parents? What
tells the ends of your ?ngers to grow soft pads on one side and
hard, protective nails on the other?
In Charles Darwin’s day, the answers to such questions were
shrouded in mystery. Darwin himself was fascinated by the way
traits are passed along from one generation to the next, but he
knew little about the laws of genetics and even less about the
mechanisms within the cell that govern heredity. Now, however,
biologists have spent decades studying human genetics and
the detailed instructions that are embedded in the amazing molecule called DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Of course, the big question is, Where did these instructions come from?

What do many scientists claim? Many
biologists and other scientists feel that
DNA and its coded instructions came
about through undirected chance events
that took place over the course of millions of years. They say that there is no
evidence of design in the structure of this
molecule nor in the information that it
carries and transmits nor in the way that
it functions.17
What does the Bible say? The Bible suggests that the formation of our di?erent
body parts—and even the timing of their
formation—involves a ?gurative book
that originates with God. Notice how
King David was inspired to describe mat-

ters, saying of God: “Your eyes saw even
the embryo of me, and in your book all its
parts were down in writing, as regards the
days when they were formed and there
was not yet one among them.”—Psalm
139:16.
What does the evidence reveal? If evolution is true, then it should seem at
least reasonably possible that DNA could
have come about by means of a series of
chance events. If the Bible is true, then
DNA should provide strong evidence
that it is the product of an orderly, intelligent mind.
When considered in the simplest of
terms, the subject of DNA is quite

3 WHERE DID THE INSTRUCTIONS COME FROM?

13

understandable—and fascinating. So let
us take another trip to the inside of a
cell. This time, though, we will visit a human cell. Imagine that you are going to
a museum designed to teach you about
how such a cell works. The whole museum is a model of a typical human cell
—but magni?ed some 13,000,000 times.
It is the size of a giant sports arena, the
kind that can seat an audience of about
70,000 people.
You enter the museum and stare awestruck at this wondrous place full of
strange forms and structures. Near the
center of the cell stands the nucleus, a
sphere about 20 stories tall. You make
your way there.
You go through a door in the nucleus’
outer skin, or membrane, and look
around you. Dominating this chamber
are 46 chromosomes. Arranged in identical pairs, they vary in height, but the pair
nearest you is about 12 stories tall (1).
Each chromosome has a pinched place
near the middle, so it looks a bit like a
link sausage but is as thick as a massive
tree trunk. You see a variety of bands
running across the model chromosomes.
As you draw closer, you see that each
horizontal band is divided by vertical
lines. Between those are shorter horizontal lines (2). Are they stacks of books?
No; they are the outer edges of loops,
packed tightly in columns. You pull at
one of them, and it comes free. You are
amazed to see that the loop is composed
of smaller coils (3), also neatly arranged.
Within those coils is the main feature of
all of this—something resembling a long,
long rope. What is it?
THE STRUCTURE OF
AN AMAZING MOLECULE
Let us simply call this part of the model chromosome a rope. It is about an
14

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

inch thick. It is looped tightly around
spools (4), which help to form the coils
within coils. These coils are attached
to a kind of sca?old that holds them in
place. A sign on the display explains that
the rope is packed very e?ciently. If you
were to pull the rope from each of these
model chromosomes and lay it all out,
from end to end it would stretch about
halfway around the earth!1
One science book calls this e?cient
packaging system “an extraordinary feat
of engineering.”18 Does the suggestion
that there was no engineer behind this
feat sound credible to you? If this museum had a huge store with millions of
items for sale and they were all so ti1 The textbook Molecular Biology of the Cell uses a
di?erent scale. It says that trying to pack these long
strands into a cell nucleus would be like trying to pack
24 miles of very ?ne thread into a tennis ball—but
in such a neat, organized way that each part of the
thread remains easily accessible.

1
1

dily arranged that you could easily ?nd
any item you needed, would you assume
that no one had organized the place? Of
course not! But such order would be a
simple feat by comparison.
In the museum display, a sign invites
you to take a length of this rope in your
hands for a closer look (5). As you run it
between your ?ngers, you see that this is
no ordinary rope. It is composed of two
strands twisted around each other. The
strands are connected by tiny bars, evenly spaced. The rope looks like a ladder
that has been twisted until it resembles a
spiral staircase (6). Then it hits you: You
are holding a model of the DNA molecule—one of the great mysteries of life!

A single DNA molecule, tidily packaged with its spools and sca?old, makes
up a chromosome. The rungs of the ladder are known as base pairs (7). What do
they do? What is all of this for? A display
sign o?ers a simpli?ed explanation.
THE ULTIMATE INFORMATION
STORAGE SYSTEM
The key to the DNA, the sign says,
lies in those rungs, the bars connecting the two sides of the ladder. Imagine the ladder split apart. Each side has
partial rungs sticking out. They come in
only four types. Scientists dub them A,
T, G, and C. Scientists were amazed to
5

a “feat of engineering”
How DNA Is Packed
Packing the DNA into the nucleus is
an amazing feat of engineering—like
packing 24 miles of very ?ne thread
into a tennis ball

2
3

6
4
7

discover that the order of those letters
conveys information in a sort of code.
You may know that Morse code was
invented in the 19th century so that people could communicate by telegraph.
That code had only two “letters”—a dot
and a dash. Yet, it could be used to spell
out countless words or sentences. Well,
DNA has a four-letter code. The order in
which those letters—A, T, G, and C—appear forms “words” called codons. Codons are arranged in “stories” called
genes. Each gene contains, on average,
27,000 letters. These genes and the long
stretches between them are compiled
into chapters of a sort—the individual chromosomes. It takes 23 chromosomes to form the complete “book”—the
genome, or total of genetic information
about an organism.1
The genome would be a huge book.
How much information would it hold?
All told, the human genome is made up
of about three billion base pairs, or rungs,
on the DNA ladder.19 Imagine a set of
encyclopedias in which each volume is
over a thousand pages long. The genome
would ?ll 428 of such volumes. Adding
the second copy that is found in each
cell would make that 856 volumes. If you
were to type out the genome by yourself,
it would be a full-time job—with no vacations—lasting some 80 years!
Of course, what you would end up
with after all that typing would be useless to your body. How would you ?t hundreds of bulky volumes into each of your
100 trillion microscopic cells? To compress so much information so greatly is
far beyond us.
A professor of molecular biology and
computer science noted: “One gram of
1 Each cell contains two complete copies of the genome, 46 chromosomes in all.

16

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

DNA, which when dry would occupy a
volume of approximately one cubic centimeter, can store as much information
as approximately one trillion CDs [compact discs].”20 What does that mean? Remember, the DNA contains the genes,
the instructions for building a unique human body. Each cell has a complete set
of instructions. DNA is so dense with information that a single teaspoonful of it
could carry the instructions for building
about 350 times the number of humans
alive today! The DNA required for the
seven billion people living on earth now
would barely make a ?lm on the surface
of that teaspoon.21
A BOOK WITH NO AUTHOR?
Despite advances in miniaturization,
no man-made information storage device
can approach such a capacity. Yet, the
compact disc o?ers an apt comparison.
Consider this: A compact disc may impress us with its symmetrical shape, its
gleaming surface, its e?cient design. We

replication
How DNA Is Copied

– This part of the enzyme machine splits
the DNA into two separate strands

— This part of the machine takes in a

single strand of DNA and uses it as a
template to create a double strand

˜ Ring-shaped sliding clamp that guides
and stabilizes the enzyme machine

™ Two complete DNA strands are formed

see clear evidence that intelligent people
made it. But what if it is embedded with
information—not random gibberish, but
coherent, detailed instructions for building, maintaining, and repairing complex
machinery? That information does not
perceptibly change the weight or the size
of the disc. Yet, it is the most important
feature of that disc. Would not those written instructions convince you that there
must be some intelligent mind at work
here? Does not writing require a writer?
It is not far-fetched to compare DNA
to a compact disc or to a book. In fact,
one book about the genome notes: “The
idea of the genome as a book is not, strictly speaking, even a metaphor. It is literally true. A book is a piece of digital information . . . So is a genome.” The author
adds: “The genome is a very clever book,
because in the right conditions it can
both photocopy itself and read itself.”22
That brings up another important aspect
of DNA.

MACHINES IN MOTION
As you stand there in the quiet, you
?nd yourself wondering if the nucleus
of a cell is really as still as a museum.
Then you notice another display. Above
a glass case containing a length of model
DNA is a sign that reads: “Push Button
for Demonstration.” You push the button, and a narrator explains: “DNA has
at least two very important jobs. The ?rst
is called replication. DNA has to be copied so that every new cell will have a complete copy of the same genetic information. Please watch this simulation.”
Through a door at one end of the display comes a complex-looking machine.
It is actually a cluster of robots closely linked together. The machine goes to
the DNA, attaches itself, and begins to
move along the DNA as a train might follow a track. It moves a little too fast for
you to see exactly what it is doing, but

3
4

3
2
If DNA were the size of a railroad
track, the enzyme machine would
be moving at the rate of over
50 miles per hour

1
3
4

2

17

One gram of DNA carries as much
information as a trillion CDs could

you can easily see that behind it, there are
now two complete DNA ropes instead of
one.
The narrator explains: “This is a greatly simpli?ed version of what goes on
when DNA is replicated. A group of molecular machines called enzymes travel
along the DNA, ?rst splitting it in two,
then using each strand as a template to
make a new, complementary strand. We
cannot show you all the parts involved
—such as the tiny device that runs ahead
of the replication machine and snips
one side of the DNA so that it can twirl
around freely instead of getting wound
up too tight. Nor can we show you how
the DNA is ‘proofread’ several times.
Errors are detected and corrected to an
amazing degree of accuracy.”—See the
diagram on pages 16 and 17.
The narrator continues: “What we can
show you clearly is the speed. You noticed this robot moving at a pretty good
clip, didn’t you? Well, the actual enzyme
machinery moves along the DNA ‘track’
at a rate of about 100 rungs, or base
pairs, every second.23 If the ‘track’ were
the size of a railroad track, this ‘engine’
would be barreling along at the rate of
over 50 miles per hour. In bacteria, these

3

18

little replication machines can move ten
times faster than that! In the human cell,
armies of hundreds of these replication
machines go to work at di?erent spots
along the DNA ‘track.’ They copy the entire genome in just eight hours.”24 (See
the box “A Molecule That Can Be Read
and Copied,” on page 20.)
“READING” DNA
The DNA-replicating robots trundle
o? the scene. Another machine appears.
It too moves along a stretch of DNA,
but more slowly. You see the DNA rope
entering one end of this machine and
emerging from the other—unchanged.
But a single strand, a new one, is coming
out of a separate opening in the machine,
like a growing tail. What is going on?
Again the narrator provides an explanation: “DNA’s second job is called transcription. The DNA never leaves the
safe shelter of the nucleus. So how can
its genes—the recipes for all the proteins
your body is made of—ever be read and
used? Well, this enzyme machine ?nds
a spot along the DNA where a gene has
been switched on by chemical signals
coming in from outside the cell nucleus.
Then this machine uses a molecule called
RNA (ribonucleic acid) to make a copy
of that gene. RNA looks a lot like a single strand of DNA, but it is di?erent. Its

human cell at the same time? What an
awe-inspiring spectacle that would be!
You realize, though, that all these
processes carried out by tiny, complex
machines are actually going on right now
in your own 100 trillion cells! Your DNA
is being read, providing directions to
build the hundreds of thousands of different proteins that make up your body
—its enzymes, tissues, organs, and so on.
Right now your DNA is being copied and
proofread for errors so that a fresh set of
directions is there to be read in each new
cell.

job is to pick up the information coded
in the genes. The RNA gets that information while in the enzyme machine, then
exits the nucleus and heads to one of the
ribosomes, where the information will be
used to build a protein.”
As you watch the demonstration, you
are ?lled with wonder. You are deeply impressed by this museum and the ingenuity of those who designed and built its
machines. But what if this entire place
with all its exhibits could be set in motion, demonstrating all the thousands
upon thousands of tasks that go on in the

transcription
How DNA Is “Read”

– The DNA is unwound here. An exposed strand
passes information to the RNA

— The RNA “reads” the DNA, picking up the code

within a gene. The DNA code tells the transcription
machine where to start and stop

˜ Loaded with information, the RNA exits the cell

nucleus and goes to a ribosome, where it will impart
the instructions on how to build a complex protein

™ Transcription machine
1

4
2

19

A MOLECULE THAT CAN BE READ AND COPIED

C

G

T

A

C

How can DNA be read and copied so reliably? The four chemical bases used in the DNA ladder—A, T, G, and C—form the
ladder’s individual rungs by always pairing in the same way:
A with T, and G with C. If one side of a rung is A, the other side
is always T; G always meets C. Therefore, if you have one side
of the ladder, you know the other side of the ladder. Where one
side of the ladder reads GTCA, the other side must read CAGT.
The partial rungs di?er in length, but when they pair up with
their complements, they make complete rungs of one uniform
length.
Discovering that fact led scientists to another breakthrough
about this remarkable molecule: DNA is perfectly suited for
being copied over and over. The enzyme machine that replicates DNA takes in free-?oating units of those four chemicals
from the environment in the nucleus. Then it uses them to
complete each rung on the split DNA strand.
So a DNA molecule really is like a book that is read and copied
over and over again. In the average life span of a human, DNA
is copied some 10,000,000,000,000,000 times, with amazing
?delity.28

G

T

A

G

C

WHY DO THESE FACTS MATTER?
Again, let us ask ourselves, ‘Where did all these
instructions come from?’ The Bible suggests that
this “book” and its writing originate with a superhuman Author. Is that conclusion really out-ofdate or unscienti?c?
Consider this: Could humans even build the
museum just described? They would run into real
di?culty if they tried. Much about the human genome and how it functions is little understood as
yet. Scientists are still trying to ?gure out where
all the genes are and what they do. And the genes
comprise only a small part of the DNA strand.
What about all those long stretches that do not
contain genes? Scientists have called those parts
junk DNA, but more recently they have been
modifying that stance. Those parts may control
how and to what extent the genes are used. And
even if scientists could create a full model of the

DNA and the machines that copy and
proofread it, could they make it actually
function as the real one does?
Famous scientist Richard Feynman
left this note on a blackboard shortly before his death: “What I cannot create, I
do not understand.”25 His candid humility is refreshing, and his statement, obviously true in the case of DNA.
Scientists cannot create DNA with all
its replication and transcription machinery; nor can they fully understand it. Yet,
some assert that they know that it all
came about by undirected chance and accidents. Does the evidence that you have
considered really support such a conclusion?
Some learned men have decided that
the evidence points the other way. For
example, Francis Crick, a scientist who
helped to discover DNA’s double-helix
structure, decided that this molecule is
far too organized to have come about
through undirected events. He proposed
that intelligent extraterrestrials may have
sent DNA to the earth to help get life
started here.26
More recently, noted philosopher Antony Flew, who advocated atheism for 50
years, did an about-face of sorts. At 81
years of age, he began to express a belief
that some intelligence must have been
at work in the creation of life. Why the
change? A study of DNA. When asked if
his new line of thought might prove unpopular among scientists, Flew reportedly answered: “That’s too bad. My whole
life has been guided by the principle
. . . [to] follow the evidence, wherever it
leads.”27
What do you think? Where does the evidence lead? Imagine that you found a
computer room in the heart of a factory. The computer is running a complex

master program that directs all the workings of that factory. What is more, that
program is constantly sending out instructions on how to build and maintain every machine there, and it is making
copies of itself and proofreading them.
What would that evidence lead you to
conclude? That the computer and its program must have made themselves or that
they were produced by orderly, intelligent minds? Really, the evidence speaks
for itself.

FACTS AND QUESTIONS
? Fact: DNA is packaged within the chromosomes
in a manner so e?cient that it has been called a
“feat of engineering.”

Question: How could such order and organization
arise by undirected chance events?
? Fact: DNA’s capacity to store information still
has no equal in today’s computer age.
Question: If human computer technicians cannot
achieve such results, how could mindless matter
do so on its own?
? Fact: DNA contains all the instructions needed
to build a unique human body and maintain it
throughout life.
Question: How could such writing come about
without a writer, such programming without a
programmer?
? Fact: For DNA to work, it has to be copied, read,
and proofread by a swarm of complex molecular
machines called enzymes, which must work
together with precision and split-second timing.

Question: Do you believe that highly complex,
highly reliable machinery can come about by
chance? Without solid proof, would not such a
belief amount to blind faith?

21

4

HAS ALL LIFE DESCENDED FROM
A COMMON ANCESTOR?
Darwin thought that all life might be traced to a common
ancestor. He imagined that the history of life on earth resembled a grand tree. Later, others believed that this “tree of
life” started as a single trunk with the ?rst simple cells. New
species branched from the trunk and continued to divide into
limbs, or families of plants and animals, and then into twigs,
all the species within the families of plants and animals alive
today. Is that really what happened?
What do many scientists claim? Many
give the impression that the fossil record
supports the theory of a common origin
for life. They also claim that because all
living things use similar “computer language,” or DNA, that all life must have
evolved from a common ancestor.
What does the Bible say? The Genesis
account states that plants, sea creatures,
land animals, and birds were created “according to their kinds.” (Genesis 1:12,
20-25) This description allows for variation within a “kind,” but it implies that
there are ?xed barriers separating the different kinds. The Bible account of creation also leads us to expect that new
types of creatures would appear in the
fossil record suddenly and fully formed.
What does the evidence reveal? Does
the evidence support the Bible’s description of events, or was Darwin correct?
BEGINNING OF THE EARTH’S HISTORY

22

What have discoveries over the past 150
years revealed?
DARWIN’S TREE CHOPPED DOWN
In recent years, scientists have been
able to compare the genetic codes of dozens of di?erent single-celled organisms as
well as those of plants and animals. They
assumed that such comparisons would
con?rm the branching “tree of life” proposed by Darwin. However, this has not
been the case.
What has the research uncovered?
In 1999 biologist Malcolm S. Gordon
wrote: “Life appears to have had many
origins. The base of the universal tree
of life appears not to have been a single
root.” Is there evidence that all the major
branches of life are connected to a single
trunk, as Darwin believed? Gordon continues: “The traditional version of the theory of common descent apparently does
TIME

1

not apply to kingdoms as presently recognized. It probably does not apply to
many, if not all, phyla, and possibly also
not to many classes within the phyla.”291
Recent research continues to contradict Darwin’s theory of common descent.
For example, in 2009 an article in New
Scientist magazine quoted evolutionary
scientist Eric Bapteste as saying: “We
have no evidence at all that the tree of
life is a reality.”30 The same article quotes
evolutionary biologist Michael Rose as
saying: “The tree of life is being politely buried, we all know that. What’s less
accepted is that our whole fundamental
view of biology needs to change.”312
WHAT ABOUT THE FOSSIL RECORD?
Many scientists point to the fossil
record as support for the idea that life
emerged from a common origin. They argue, for example, that the fossil record
documents the notion that ?sh became
amphibians and reptiles became mammals. What, though, does the fossil evidence really show?
“Instead of ?nding the gradual unfolding of life,” says evolutionary paleontologist David M. Raup, “what geologists of
Darwin’s time, and geologists of the pres1 The biological term phyla (singular, phylum) refers to a large group of animals that have the same distinctive body plan. One way that scientists classify all
living things is by a seven-step system in which each
step is more speci?c than the one before it. Step one
is kingdom, the broadest category. Then come the categories phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. For example, the horse is categorized in the following way: kingdom, Animalia; phylum, Chordata;
class, Mammalia; order, Perissodactyla; family, Equidae; genus, Equus; species, Caballus.
2 It should be noted that neither the New Scientist
article nor Bapteste nor Rose mean to suggest that
the theory of evolution is wrong. Their point, rather,
is that Darwin’s proposed tree of life, a mainstay of
his theory, is not supported by the evidence. Such
scientists still seek other explanations involving evolution.

ent day actually ?nd is a highly uneven
or jerky record; that is, species appear
in the sequence very suddenly, show little or no change during their existence in
the record, then abruptly go out of the
record.”32
In reality, the vast majority of fossils
show stability among types of creatures
over extensive amounts of time. The evidence does not show them evolving from
one type into another. Unique body plans
appear suddenly. New features appear
suddenly. For example, bats with sonar
and echolocation systems appear with no
obvious link to a more primitive ancestor.
In fact, more than half of all the major divisions of animal life seem to have
appeared in a relatively short period of
time. Because many new and distinct life
forms appear so suddenly in the fossil
record, paleontologists refer to this period as “the Cambrian explosion.” When
was the Cambrian period?
Let us assume that the estimates of researchers are accurate. In that case, the
history of the earth could be represented by a time line that stretches the length
of a soccer ?eld (1). At that scale, you
would have to walk about seven eighths
of the way down the ?eld before you
would come to what paleontologists call
the Cambrian period (2). During a small
segment of that period, the major divisions of animal life show up in the fossil record. How suddenly do they appear?
As you walk down the soccer ?eld, all
those di?erent creatures pop up in the
space of less than one step!
The relatively sudden appearance of
these diverse life forms is causing some
evolutionary researchers to question the
traditional version of Darwin’s theory.

“CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION”

TODAY

23

2

AS SHOWN
IN SOME
TEXTBOOKS

REAL RELATIVE SIZE

Why do some textbooks change the scale of the fossils
that they depict as following a proposed sequence?

For example, in an interview in 2008, evolutionary biologist Stuart Newman discussed the
need for a new theory of evolution that could explain the sudden appearance of novel forms of
life. He said: “The Darwinian mechanism that’s
used to explain all evolutionary change will be
relegated, I believe, to being just one of several
mechanisms—maybe not even the most important when it comes to understanding macroevolution, the evolution of major transitions in body
type.”33
PROBLEMS WITH THE “PROOF”
What, though, of the fossils that are used to
show ?sh changing into amphibians, and reptiles into mammals? Do they provide solid proof
of evolution in action? Upon closer inspection,
several problems become obvious.
First, the comparative size of the creatures
placed in the reptile-to-mammal sequence is
sometimes misrepresented in textbooks. Rather
than being similar in size, some creatures in the
series are huge, while others are small.
A second, more serious challenge is the lack
of proof that those creatures are somehow related. Specimens placed in the series are
often separated by what researchers estimate to be millions of years. Regarding the time spans that separate many
of these fossils, zoologist Henry Gee
says: “The intervals of time that separate the fossils are so huge that we
cannot say anything de?nite about
their possible connection through ancestry and descent.”341
Commenting on the fossils of ?sh and
amphibians, biologist Malcolm S. Gordon
states that the fossils found represent only a
small, “possibly quite unrepresentative, sample
1 Henry Gee does not suggest that the theory of evolution is
wrong. His comments are made to show the limits of what can
be learned from the fossil record.

of the biodiversity that existed in these
groups at those times.” He further says:
“There is no way of knowing to what extent, if at all, those speci?c organisms
were relevant to later developments, or
what their relationships might have been
to each other.”351
WHAT DOES THE “FILM”
REALLY SHOW?
An article published in National Geographic in 2004 likened the fossil record
to “a ?lm of evolution from which 999 of
every 1,000 frames have been lost on the
cutting-room ?oor.”36 Consider the implications of that illustration.
Imagine that you found 100 frames of
a feature ?lm that originally had 100,000
frames. How would you determine the
plot of the movie? You might have a preconceived idea, but what if only 5 of the
100 frames you found could be organized
to support your preferred plot, while the
other 95 frames tell a very di?erent story?
Would it be reasonable to assert that your
preconceived idea of the movie was right
1 Malcolm S. Gordon supports the teaching of evolution.

Actual fossil evidence shows no relationships

because of the ?ve frames? Could it be
that you placed the ?ve frames in the order you did because it suited your theory?
Would it not be more reasonable to allow the other 95 frames to in?uence your
opinion?
“To take a line of fossils and claim that
they represent a lineage is not a scienti?c
hypothesis that can be tested, but an assertion that carries the same validity as
a bedtime story—amusing, perhaps even
instructive, but not scienti?c.”—In Search of
Deep Time—Beyond the Fossil Record to a New
History of Life, by Henry Gee, pp. 116-117

How does that illustration relate to the
way evolutionists view the fossil record?
For years, researchers did not acknowledge that the vast majority of fossils—the
95 frames of the movie—showed that species change very little over time. Why the
silence about such important evidence?
Author Richard Morris says: “Apparently paleontologists had adopted the orthodox idea of gradual evolutionary change
and had held onto it, even when they discovered evidence to the contrary. They

4 HAS ALL LIFE DESCENDED FROM A COMMON ANCESTOR?

25

Mammals

Birds

Reptiles

Amphibians

Bony fish

Cartilaginous fish

Extinct armored fish with jaws

Jawless fish
GEOLOGICAL TIME PERIODS ª

Mammals

Birds

Reptiles

Amphibians

Bony fish

Cartilaginous fish

Jawless fish

Extinct armored fish with jaws

The dotted lines show the supposed
relationships

What do you think? Which conclusion

If “95 frames” of the fossil record show that
animals do not evolve from one type into
another, why do paleontologists arrange the
remaining “5 frames” to imply that they do?

had been trying to interpret fossil evidence in terms of accepted evolutionary
ideas.”37
What about evolutionists today?
Could it be that they continue to place
fossils in a certain order, not because
such a sequence is well-supported by
the majority of fossil and genetic evidence, but because doing so is in harmony with currently accepted evolutionary
ideas?1
1 See, for example, the box “What About Human
Evolution?”

?ts the evidence best? Consider the facts
we have discussed so far.
? The ?rst life on earth was not “simple.”
? The odds against even the components
of a cell arising by chance are astronomical.
? DNA, the “computer program,” or
code, that runs the cell, is incredibly complex and gives evidence of a genius that
far surpasses any program or information
storage system produced by humans.
? Genetic research shows that life did
not originate from a single common
ancestor. In addition, major groups of
animals appear suddenly in the fossil
record.
In light of these facts, do you think it is
reasonable to conclude that the evidence
is in harmony with the Bible’s explanation of the origin of life? Many people,
however, assert that science contradicts
much of what the Bible says about creation. Is that true? What does the Bible
really say?

FACTS AND QUESTIONS
? Fact: Two of evolution’s fundamental ideas
—that life has a common origin and that major
new body types appear as a result of the slow
accumulation of small changes—are being
challenged by researchers who do not support
the Bible account of creation.
Question: Given the controversy over these
pillars of Darwin’s theory, can his version of
evolution honestly be referred to as scientific
fact?

26

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

? Fact: All living organisms share similarly
designed DNA, the “computer language,” or
code, that governs much of the shape and
function of their cell or cells.
Question: Could this similarity exist, not because
they had the same ancestor, but because they
had the same Designer?

What about

human evolution?
Look up the topic of human evolution in many
textbooks and encyclopedias and you will see a
series of pictures—on one side a stooped, apelike creature followed by creatures that have progressively more upright posture and larger
heads. At the end stands modern man. Such
renderings along with sensational media reports
of the discovery of so-called missing links give
the impression that there is ample evidence that
man evolved from apelike creatures. Are such
assertions based on solid evidence? Consider
what evolutionary researchers say about the following topics.1

WHAT THE FOSSIL EVIDENCE
ACTUALLY SHOWS
?

Fact: At the beginning of the 20th century, all
the fossils that were used to support the theory
that humans and apes evolved from a common
ancestor could ?t on a billiard table. Since then,
the number of fossils used to support that theory
has increased. Now it is claimed that they would
?ll a railroad boxcar.38 However, the vast majority
of those fossils consist only of single bones and
isolated teeth. Complete skulls—let alone complete skeletons—are rare.39

Question: Has the increased number of fossils
attributed to the human “family tree” settled the
question among evolutionary experts as to when
and how humans evolved from apelike creatures?
Answer: No. In fact, the opposite is true.
When it comes to how these fossils should be
classi?ed, Robin Derricourt of the University of
New South Wales, Australia, wrote in 2009:
“Perhaps the only consensus now is that there is
no consensus.”40 In 2007 the science journal
1 Note: None of the researchers quoted in this box
believe in the Bible’s teaching of creation. All accept the
teaching of evolution.

Nature published an article by the discoverers
of another claimed link in
the evolutionary tree, saying that nothing is known
about when or how the human line actually emerged from that of apes.41
Gyula Gyenis, a researcher at the Department
¨ ¨
´
of Biological Anthropology, Eotvos Lorand University, Hungary, wrote in 2002: “The classi?cation
and the evolutionary place of hominid fossils has
been under constant debate.”1 This author also
states that the fossil evidence gathered so far
brings us no closer to knowing exactly when,
where, or how humans evolved from apelike
creatures.42

ANNOUNCEMENTS
OF “MISSING LINKS”
? Fact: The media often widely broadcasts
the announcement that a new “missing link” has
been discovered. For example, in 2009 a fossil
dubbed Ida was unveiled with what one journal
called “rock-star hype.”43 Publicity included this
headline in The Guardian newspaper of the United Kingdom (UK): “Fossil Ida: Extraordinary Find
Is ‘Missing Link’ in Human Evolution.”44 However, just days later, the UK science journal New
Scientist said: “Ida is not a ‘missing link’ in human evolution.”45

Question: Why is each unveiling of a new “missing link” given wide media attention, whereas
the removal of that fossil from the “family tree”
is hardly mentioned?
1 The term “hominid” is used to describe what evolutionary researchers feel make up the human family and
prehistoric humanlike species.

Answer: Regarding those who make these
discoveries, Robin Derricourt, quoted earlier, says: “The leader of a research team
may need to over-emphasize the uniqueness and drama of a ‘discovery’ in order to
attract research funding from outside the
conventional academic sources, and they
will certainly be encouraged in this by the
print and electronic media, looking for a dramatic story.”46

TEXTBOOK DRAWINGS
AND MODELS OF APE-MEN
? Fact: Depictions in textbooks and museums of the so-called ancestors of humans
are often shown with speci?c facial features, skin color, and amount of hair. These
depictions usually show the older “ancestors” with monkeylike features and the ones
supposedly closer to humans with more humanlike facial features, skin tone, and hair.

Question: Can scientists reliably reconstruct such features based on the fossilized
remains that they find?
Answer: No. In 2003, forensics expert
Carl N. Stephan, who works at the Department of Anatomical Sciences, The University
of Adelaide, Australia, wrote: “The faces
of earlier human ancestors cannot be objectively constructed or tested.” He says that
attempts to do so based on modern apes
“are likely to be heavily biased, grossly inaccurate, and invalid.” His conclusion? “Any
facial ‘reconstructions’ of earlier hominids
are likely to be misleading.”47

DETERMINING INTELLIGENCE
BY BRAIN SIZE
? Fact: The brain size of a presumed
ancestor of humans is one of the main ways
by which evolutionists determine how closely or distantly the creature is supposed to be
related to humans.

28

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

Question: Is brain size a reliable indicator of
intelligence?
Answer: No. One group of researchers
who used brain size to speculate which extinct creatures were more closely related
to man admitted that in doing so they “often feel on shaky ground.”48 Why? Consider the statement made in 2008 in Scientific American Mind: “Scientists have failed
to ?nd a correlation between absolute or relative brain size and acumen among humans
and other animal species. Neither have they
been able to discern a parallel between wits
and the size or existence of speci?c regions
of the brain, excepting perhaps Broca’s
area, which governs speech in people.”49
What do you think? Why do scientists line
up the fossils used in the “ape-to-man”
chain according to brain size when it is
known that brain size is not a reliable measure of intelligence? Are they forcing the evidence to ?t their theory? And why are researchers constantly debating which fossils
should be included in the human “family
tree”? Could it be that the fossils they study
are just what they appear to be, extinct
forms of apes?
What, though, about the humanlike fossils
of the so-called Neanderthals, often portrayed as proof that a type of ape-man existed? Researchers are beginning to alter
their view of what these actually were. In
2009, Milford H. Wolpo? wrote in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology that
“Neandertals may have been a true human
race.”50
Honest observers readily recognize that
egos, money, and the need for media attention in?uence the way that “evidence” for
human evolution is presented. Are you willing to put your trust in such evidence?

WHAT IS WRONG
WITH THIS
PICTURE?

? Such pictures as this are based on the
biases and assumptions of researchers
and artists, not on facts.51
? The majority of such drawings are
based on partial skulls and isolated teeth.
Complete skulls, let alone complete
skeletons, are rare.
? There is no consensus among researchers
as to how the fossils of the various creatures
should be classi?ed.
? Artists cannot reliably reconstruct the facial
features, skin tone, and hair of these extinct
creatures.
? Each creature is placed in its position leading to
modern man largely because of the size of its brain
case. This is done despite evidence that brain size
is not a reliable indicator of intelligence.

4 HAS ALL LIFE DESCENDED FROM A COMMON ANCESTOR?

29

5

IS IT REASONABLE TO
BELIEVE THE BIBLE?
Have you ever been misled about a person? Maybe you heard others talk about
him or quote him. You expected to dislike him—only to ?nd, on getting to know him,
that he had been misrepresented. Many have had such an experience regarding
the Bible.
More than a few educated people take a dim view of the Bible. Can you understand why? That book is often represented or quoted in such a way that it sounds
unreasonable, unscienti?c, or just plain wrong. Is it possible that the Bible has
been misrepresented?

In the course of reading this brochure,
were you surprised to learn that what
the Bible says is scienti?cally accurate?
Many people are. They are equally surprised to learn that the Bible does not say
some of the things that many religions
claim that it says. Some say, for example, that the Bible teaches that God made
the universe and all life in it within six
24-hour days. In fact, there is nothing in
the Bible that contradicts scientists’ various estimates on the age of the universe
or the earth.1
Furthermore, the Bible’s brief outline of how God brought life into being on this planet leaves ample room
for scienti?c inquiry and theory. The Bible does state that God created all life
and that living things are made “according to their kinds.” (Genesis 1:11, 21, 24)
These statements may be at odds with
1 For more information, see the brochure Was Life
Created? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

30

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

certain scienti?c theories, but not with
established scienti?c fact. The history of
science shows that theories come and go;
the facts remain.
There are many people, though, who
hesitate to investigate the Bible because
they are disillusioned with religion. They
look at organized religion and see hypocrisy, corruption, warmongering. But is it
fair to judge the Bible by the behavior of
some who claim to represent it? Many
humane and sincere scientists have been
horri?ed by the way that some violent
bigots have used the evolution theory to
support their racist aims. Would it be fair
to judge the theory of evolution on that
basis? Surely it is better to investigate the
theory’s claims and compare them with
the available evidence.
We urge you to do the same with the
Bible. You may be pleasantly surprised to
learn how profoundly its teachings di?er
from those of most organized religions.

Far from promoting wars and ethnic violence, the Bible teaches that God’s servants must repudiate war and even the
hatred that leads to such violence. (Isaiah
2:2-4; Matthew 5:43, 44; 26:52) Far from
advocating fanaticism and belief without
evidence, the Bible teaches that evidence
is essential to genuine faith and that the
power of reason is an indispensable aid
to serving God. (Romans 12:1; Hebrews
11:1) Far from squelching curiosity, the
Bible encourages us to probe some of the
most fascinating and challenging questions that humans have ever faced.
For example, have you ever wondered,
‘If there is a God, why does he allow
wickedness?’ The Bible addresses that
question, as well as many others, in a satisfying way.1 We urge you to pursue your
quest for truth. You can ?nd answers that
are fascinating, thrilling, reasonable—and
based on convincing evidence. And that
is no accident.
1 See chapter 11 of the book What Does the Bible
Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. How Did Life Begin?
1. How Life Began—Evolution’s Three
Geneses, by Alexandre Meinesz, translated by Daniel Simberlo?, 2008, pp. 3033, 45.
a. Life Itself—Its Origin and Nature, by
Francis Crick, 1981, pp. 15-16, 141-153.
2. Scientific American, “A Simpler Origin
for Life,” by Robert Shapiro, June 2007,
p. 48.
a. The New York Times, “A Leading Mystery of Life’s Origins Is Seemingly
Solved,” by Nicholas Wade, May 14,
2009, p. A23.
3. Scientific American, June 2007, p. 48.
4. Scientific American, June 2007, pp. 47,
49-50.
5. Information Theory, Evolution, and the
Origin of Life, by Hubert P. Yockey,
2005, p. 182.

6. NASA’s Astrobiology Magazine,
“Life’s Working De?nition—Does
It Work?” (http://www.nasa.gov/
vision/universe/starsgalaxies/
life’sworkingde?nition.html),
accessed 3/17/2009.

2. Is Any Form of Life Really
Simple?
7. Princeton Weekly Bulletin, “Nuts, Bolts
of Who We Are,” by Steven Schultz,
May 1, 2000, (http://www.princeton.edu/
pr/pwb/00/0501/p/brain.shtml), accessed
3/27/2009.
a. “The Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine 2002,” Press Release, October 7, 2002, (http://nobelprize.org/
nobelprizes/medicine/laureates/2002/
press.html), accessed 3/27/2009.
8. “The Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine 2002,” October 7, 2002.

9. Encyclopædia Britannica, CD 2003,
“Cell,” “The Mitochondrion and the
Chloroplast,” subhead, “The Endosymbiont Hypothesis.”
10. How Life Began—Evolution’s Three
Geneses, p. 32.
11. Molecular Biology of the Cell, Second
Edition, by Bruce Alberts et al, 1989,
p. 405.
12. Molecular Human Reproduction,
“The Role of Proteomics in De?ning
the Human Embryonic Secretome,”
by M. G. Katz-Ja?e, S. McReynolds,
D. K. Gardner, and W. B. Schoolcraft,
2009, p. 271.
13. Between Necessity and Probability:
Searching for the Definition and Origin
of Life, by Radu Popa, 2004, p. 129.
14. Between Necessity and Probability:
Searching for the Definition and Origin
of Life, pp. 126-127.

(Box) How Fast Can a Cell
Reproduce?

27. Associated Press Newswires, “Famous Atheist Now Believes in God,” by
Richard N. Ostling, December 9, 2004.

15. Origin of Mitochondria and Hydrogenosomes, by William F. Martin and
´
¨
Miklos Muller, 2007, p. 21.
16. Brain Matters—Translating Research
Into Classroom Practice, by Pat Wolfe,
2001, p. 16.

28. Intelligent Life in the Universe, Second
Edition, by Peter Ulmschneider, 2006,
p. 125.

3. Where Did the Instructions
Come From?

4. Has All Life Descended From
a Common Ancestor?

17. Research News Berkeley Lab, (http:
//www.lbl.gov/Science-Articles/Archive/
LSD-molecular-DNA.html), article:
“Molecular DNA Switch Found to Be
the Same for All Life,” contact: Lynn
Yarris, p. 1 of 4; accessed 2/10/2009.
18. Life Script, by Nicholas Wade, 2001,
p. 79.
19. Bioinformatics Methods in Clinical
Research, edited by Rune Matthiesen,
2010, p. 49.
20. Scientific American, “Computing
With DNA,” by Leonard M. Adleman,
August 1998, p. 61.
21. Nano Letters, “Enumeration of DNA
Molecules Bound to a Nanomechanical
Oscillator,” by B. Ilic, Y. Yang, K. Aubin, R. Reichenbach, S. Krylov, and
H. G. Craighead, Vol. 5, No. 5, 2005,
pp. 925, 929.
22. Genome—The Autobiography of a
Species in 23 Chapters, by Matt Ridley,
1999, pp. 7-8.
23. Essential Cell Biology, Second Edition, by Bruce Alberts, Dennis Bray,
Karen Hopkin, Alexander Johnson,
Julian Lewis, Martin Ra?, Keith Roberts, and Peter Walter, 2004, p. 201.
24. Molecular Biology of the Cell, Fourth
Edition, by Bruce Alberts et al, 2002,
p. 258.
25. No Ordinary Genius—The Illustrated
Richard Feynman, edited by Christopher
Sykes, 1994, photo with no page number
supplied; note caption.
a. New Scientist, “Second Genesis
—Life, but Not As We Know It,” by
Bob Holmes, March 11, 2009, (http://
www.newscientist.com/article/
mg20126990.100) accessed 3/11/2009.
26. The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence—A Philosophical Inquiry, by David
Lamb, 2001, p. 83.

29. Biology and Philosophy, “The Concept of Monophyly: A Speculative Essay,” by Malcolm S. Gordon, 1999,
p. 335.
30. New Scientist, “Uprooting Darwin’s
Tree,” by Graham Lawton, January 24,
2009, p. 34.
31. New Scientist, January 24, 2009,
pp. 37, 39.
32. Field Museum of Natural History
Bulletin, “Con?icts Between Darwin
and Paleontology,” by David M. Raup,
January 1979, p. 23.
33. Archaeology, “The Origin of
Form Was Abrupt Not Gradual,”
by Suzan Mazur, October 11, 2008,
(www.archaeology.org/online/
interviews/newman.html),
accessed 2/23/2009.
34. In Search of Deep Time—Beyond the
Fossil Record to a New History of Life,
by Henry Gee, 1999, p. 23.
35. Biology and Philosophy, p. 340.
36. National Geographic, “Fossil Evidence,” November 2004, p. 25.
37. The Evolutionists—The Struggle for
Darwin’s Soul, by Richard Morris, 2001,
pp. 104-105.

(Box) A Molecule That Can Be
Read and Copied

(Box) What About Human
Evolution?
38. The Human Lineage, by Matt Cartmill and Fred H. Smith, 2009, Preface,
p. xi.
39. Fossils, Teeth and Sex—New Perspectives on Human Evolution, by Charles
E. Oxnard, 1987, Preface, pp. xi, xii.
a. From Lucy to Language, by Donald Johanson and Blake Edgar, 1996, p. 22.
b. Anthropologie, XLII/1, “Palaeodemography and Dental Microwear of Homo
Habilis From East Africa,” by Laura M.
´
Martinez, Jordi Galbany, and Alejandro
´
´
Perez-Perez, 2004, p. 53.

c. In Search of Deep Time—Beyond the
Fossil Record to a New History of Life,
p. 22.
40. Critique of Anthropology, Volume 29(2), “Patenting Hominins—Taxonomies, Fossils and Egos,” by Robin
Derricourt, 2009, pp. 195-196, 198.
41. Nature, “A New Species of Great
Ape From the Late Miocene Epoch in
Ethiopia,” by Gen Suwa, Reiko T. Kono,
Shigehiro Katoh, Berhane Asfaw,
and Yonas Beyene, August 23, 2007,
p. 921.
42. Acta Biologica Szegediensis, Volume 46(1-2), “New Findings—New Problems in Classi?cation of Hominids,”
by Gyula Gyenis, 2002, pp. 57, 59.
43. New Scientist, “A Fine Fossil—But a
Missing Link She’s Not,” by Chris Bead,
May 30, 2009, p. 18.
44. The Guardian, London, “Fossil
Ida: Extraordinary Find Is ‘Missing Link’
in Human Evolution,” by James Randerson, May 19, 2009, (http://
www.guardian.co.uk/science/2009/
may/19/ida-fossil-missing-link),
accessed 8/25/2009.
45. New Scientist, May 30, 2009,
pp. 18-19.
46. Critique of Anthropology, Volume 29(2), p. 202.
47. Science and Justice, Vol. 43, No. 4,
(2003) section, Forensic Anthropology,
“Anthropological Facial ‘Reconstruction’—Recognizing the Fallacies, ‘Unembracing’ the Errors, and Realizing Method Limits,” by C. N. Stephan, p. 195.
48. The Human Fossil Record—Volume
Three, by Ralph L. Holloway, Douglas C.
Broad?eld, and Michael S. Yuan, 2004,
Preface xvi.
49. Scientific American Mind, “Intelligence Evolved,” by Ursula Dicke and
Gerhard Roth, August/September 2008,
p. 72.
50. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, “How Neandertals Inform Human Variation,” by Milford H. Wolpo?,
2009, p. 91.
51. Conceptual Issues in Human Modern
Origins Research, Editors G. A. Clark
and C. M. Willermet, 1997, pp. 5, 60.
a. Wonderful Life—The Burgess Shale and
the Nature of History, by Stephen Jay
Gould, 1989, p. 28.

Would you welcome more information?

You may contact Jehovah’s Witnesses at www.jw.org.
lf-E

