“KEEP YOURSELVES IN
GOD’S LOVE ”
Large-Print Edition

s

lvlp-E
160510

? How can you demonstrate that
you truly love God?
? How can you know when to
trust your conscience?
? What does your choice of
friends reveal about you?
? Why does your view of authority
influence God’s view of you?
? Why is obeying God’s moral standards in your best interests?
? How can you find fulfillment in
your work?
? What will help you cultivate the
desire to obey Jehovah?

“KEEP YOURSELVES IN
GOD’S LOVE ”
Large-Print Edition
THIS BOOK IS THE PROPERTY OF

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the
modern-language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”—Large Print
April 2016 Printing
English (lvlp-E)
? 2008, 2014
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

C O N T EN T S
CHAPTER

1. “This Is What the
Love of God Means”

PAGE

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

2. How Can You Maintain a
Good Conscience? · · · · · · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

3. Love Those Whom God Loves

17

· · · · · · · · ·

31

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

45

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

64

4. Why Respect Authority?
5. How to Keep Separate
From the World · · · · · · · ·

5

6. How to Choose Wholesome
Entertainment · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · ·

7. Do You Value Life as God Does?
8. God Loves Clean People

· · · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

9. “Flee From Sexual Immorality!”
10. Marriage—A Gift From a
Loving God · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

79
94

111

· · · · ·

125

· · · · · · · · · · · ·

142

11. “Let Marriage Be Honorable”

· · · · · · · ·

157

12. Speak What “Is Good
for Building Up” · · · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

13. Celebrations That Displease God

172

· · · ·

187

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

208

15. Find Enjoyment for
Your Hard Work · · · ·

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

222

16. Oppose the Devil
and His Crafty Acts

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

237

14. Be Honest in All Things

17. “Build Yourselves Up
on Your Most Holy Faith”
Appendix

· · · · · · · · · · · ·

254

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

266

Dear Lover of Jehovah:
“You will know the truth, and the truth will set you
free,” said Jesus. (John 8:32) How encouraging those
words are! Yes, it is possible to know the truth, even
in these critical “last days” when falsehood abounds.
(2 Timothy 3:1) Do you remember when you ?rst
recognized the truth as explained in God’s Word? What a
thrilling experience that was!
However, as important as it is to have an accurate
knowledge of the truth and to have a regular share in
telling others about it, we must also conduct ourselves in
harmony with the truth. To do that, we need to keep ourselves in God’s love. What does this involve? Jesus’ words
on the night before his death answer this question. He
told his faithful apostles: “If you observe my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have
observed the commandments of the Father and remain
in his love.”—John 15:10.
Notice that Jesus remained in God’s love by observing
his Father’s commandments. The same is true of us
today. To remain in God’s love, we need to apply the
truth in everyday life. That same evening, Jesus said: “If
you know these things, happy you are if you do them.”
—John 13:17.
It is our sincere hope that this publication will help you
to continue to apply the truth in your life and thus keep
yourself “in God’s love . . . with everlasting life in view.”
—Jude 21.
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

CHAPTER 1

“This Is What the Love
of God Means”
“This is what the love of God means, that we
observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome.” —1 JOHN 5:3.
DO YOU love God? If you have come into a dedicated relationship with Jehovah God, your answer
surely is an emphatic yes—and rightly so! It is only
natural for us to love Jehovah. Our love for God is
really in response to his love for us. The Bible puts
it this way: “We love, because he [Jehovah] ?rst
loved us.”—1 John 4:19.
Jehovah has taken the initiative to express his
love for us. He provides us with a beautiful earthly
home. He cares for our physical and material needs.
(Matthew 5:43-48) More important, he looks after
our spiritual needs. He gives us his Word, the Bible.
In addition, he invites us to pray to him with the assurance that he will hear us and will give us his holy
spirit to help us. (Psalm 65:2; Luke 11:13) Above all,
2

1, 2. What motivates you to love Jehovah God?
“This Is What the Love of God Means”

5

he sent his most precious Son to be our Ransomer
so that we might be delivered from sin and death.
What great love Jehovah has shown to us!—Read
John 3:16; Romans 5:8.
3

Jehovah wants us to bene?t from his love forever.

Whether we will or not, however, is really up to
us. God’s Word admonishes us: “Keep yourselves
in God’s love . . . with everlasting life in view.”
(Jude 21) The phrase “keep yourselves” suggests that
to remain in God’s love, action on our part is required. We need to respond to his love in concrete
ways. An important question for us to consider,
then, is this, ‘How can I demonstrate my love for
God?’ The answer is found in the inspired words of
the apostle John: “This is what the love of God
means, that we observe his commandments; and yet
his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John
5:3) We do well to examine carefully the meaning of
these words, for we want to show our God just how
much we love him.
3. (a) To remain in God’s love, what is required on our part? (b) What
important question do we need to consider, and where is the answer
found?
6

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

“THIS IS WHAT THE LOVE OF G OD MEANS”
4 “The love of God”—what did the apostle John
have in mind when he penned those words? This expression refers, not to God’s love for us, but to our
love for him. Can you recall when love for Jehovah
began to grow in your heart?
Re?ect, for a moment, on when you ?rst learned
the truth about Jehovah and his purposes and you
began to exercise faith. You came to understand that
although you were born a sinner alienated from God,
Jehovah through Christ opened the way for you to
attain the perfection that Adam lost and to inherit
everlasting life. (Matthew 20:28; Romans 5:12, 18)
You began to appreciate the magnitude of the sacri?ce Jehovah made in sending his most precious Son
to die for you. Your heart was moved, and you began to feel a love for the God who has shown such
great love for you.—Read 1 John 4:9, 10.
5

That feeling, however, was but the beginning of
genuine love for Jehovah. Love is not just a feeling;
6

4, 5. (a) To what does the expression “the love of God” refer? (b) Describe how love for Jehovah began to grow in your heart.
6. How is genuine love expressed, and what did love for God move you
to do?
“This Is What the Love of God Means”

7

nor is it a matter of mere words. True love for God
involves more than simply saying, “I love Jehovah.”
Like faith, genuine love is de?ned and characterized
by the actions it prompts. (James 2:26) Speci?cally,
love expresses itself in deeds pleasing to the one who
is loved. Hence, when love for Jehovah took root in
your heart, you were moved to want to live in a way
that pleases your heavenly Father. Are you a baptized Witness? If so, this deep a?ection and devotion
caused you to make the most important decision of
your life. You dedicated yourself to Jehovah to do
his will, and you symbolized your dedication by getting baptized. (Read Romans 14:7, 8.) Ful?lling this
solemn promise to Jehovah involves what the apostle John next mentions.
7

“WE OBSERVE HIS COMMANDMENTS”
John explains what the love of God means: “We

observe his commandments.” What are God’s commandments? Jehovah gives us a number of speci?c
commands through his Word, the Bible. For example, he forbids such practices as drunkenness, sexual
7. What are some of God’s commandments, and what does observing
these involve?
8

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

immorality, idolatry, stealing, and lying. (1 Corinthians 5:11; 6:18; 10:14; Ephesians 4:28; Colossians 3:9)
Observing God’s commandments involves living in
harmony with the Bible’s clear moral standards.
8

To please Jehovah, however, we need to do more

than just obey his direct commands. Jehovah does
not hem us in with laws governing every aspect of
our daily life. Hence, in the course of each day, we
may encounter many situations for which there are
no speci?c Bible commands. In such cases, how can
we know what will be pleasing to Jehovah? The Bible contains clear indications of God’s way of thinking. As we study the Bible, we learn what Jehovah
loves and what he hates. (Read Psalm 97:10; Proverbs
6:16-19) We come to discern attitudes and actions
that he values. The more we learn about Jehovah’s
personality and ways, the more we will be able to let
his thinking mold our decisions and in?uence our actions. Thus, even in situations where there is no
speci?c Bible law, we can often perceive “what the
will of Jehovah is.”—Ephesians 5:17.
8, 9. How can we know what is pleasing to Jehovah even in situations
where there is no direct Bible law? Give an example.
“This Is What the Love of God Means”

9

For example, the Bible contains no direct command telling us not to watch movies or TV programs
that feature gross violence or sexual immorality. But
do we really need a speci?c law against watching
such things? We know how Jehovah views these matters. His Word plainly tells us: “[Jehovah] hates anyone who loves violence.” (Psalm 11:5) It also says:
“God will judge sexually immoral people.” (Hebrews
13:4) By re?ecting on those inspired words, we can
clearly perceive what the will of Jehovah is. We
therefore choose not to be entertained by watching
graphic portrayals of the sort of practices that our
God hates. We know that it pleases Jehovah when
we avoid the moral ?lth that this world tries to pass
o? as harmless entertainment.1
9

What is the primary reason that we observe
God’s commandments? Why do we want to live each
day in harmony with what we know to be God’s way
of thinking? We do not choose such a course simply
to escape punishment or to avoid the harmful con10

1 See Chapter 6 of this publication for a discussion of how to
choose wholesome entertainment.

10, 11. Why do we choose a course of obedience to Jehovah, and what
sort of obedience do we give him?
10

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

sequences that come to those who ignore God’s will.
(Galatians 6:7) Instead, we view obedience to Jehovah as a precious opportunity to show our love for
him. Just as a child is eager to win his father’s smile
of approval, so we want to win Jehovah’s approval.
(Psalm 5:12) He is our Father, and we love him.
Nothing brings us greater joy or deeper satisfaction
than knowing that we are living in a way that “obtains Jehovah’s approval.”—Proverbs 12:2.
11 Our obedience, then, is not given begrudgingly;
nor is it selective or conditional.1 We do not pick and
choose, obeying only when it is convenient or when
doing so presents little or no challenge. On the contrary, we are “obedient from the heart.” (Romans 6:
17) We feel as did the Bible psalmist who wrote: “I
am fond of your commandments, yes, I love them.”
(Psalm 119:47) Yes, we love to obey Jehovah. We
recognize that he deserves—and requires—nothing
less than our complete and unconditional obedience.
(Deuteronomy 12:32) We want Jehovah to say of us
what his Word says of Noah. Regarding that faithful
1 Even the wicked spirits can begrudgingly obey. When Jesus ordered the demons to come out of some possessed people, the
demons were forced to recognize his authority and obey, although
unwillingly.—Mark 1:27; 5:7-13.
“This Is What the Love of God Means”

11

patriarch, who showed love for God by being obedient over many decades, the Bible says: “Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. He did
just so.”—Genesis 6:22.
How does Jehovah feel about our willing obedience? His Word says that we thereby make his “heart
rejoice.” (Proverbs 27:11) Does our obedience really
bring joy to the heart of the Sovereign Lord of the
universe? Indeed, it does—and for good reason! Jehovah created us as free moral agents. This means
that we have freedom of choice; we can choose to
obey God, or we can choose to disobey him. (Deuteronomy 30:15, 16, 19, 20) When we willingly choose
to obey Jehovah and when the motivating force behind that decision is a heart full of love for God, we
bring great pleasure and joy to our heavenly Father.
(Proverbs 11:20) We are also choosing the best way
of life.
12

13

“HIS COMMANDMENTS
ARE NOT BURDENS OME”
The apostle John tells us something very reassur-

12. When does our obedience bring joy to Jehovah’s heart?
13, 14. Why can it be said that God’s “commandments are not burdensome,” and how might this be illustrated?
12

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ing about Jehovah’s requirements: “His commandments are not burdensome.” The Greek word translated “burdensome” at 1 John 5:3 literally means
“heavy.”1 Another Bible translation here reads: “His
commandments do not weigh us down.” (New English Translation) Jehovah’s requirements are not unreasonable or oppressive. His laws are not beyond
the ability of imperfect humans to obey.
14

We might illustrate it this way. A close friend

asks you to help him move to another residence.
There are many boxes to be transported. Some of
them are light enough for one person to carry comfortably, but others are heavy and require two people to lift them. Your friend selects the boxes he
wants you to move. Would he ask you to pick up boxes that he knows are too heavy for you? No. He
would not want you to hurt yourself by trying to carry them alone. Similarly, our loving and kind God
1 At Matthew 23:4, this word is used to describe the “heavy loads,”
the minute rules and man-made traditions that the scribes and
Pharisees put upon the common people. The same word is rendered “oppressive” at Acts 20:29, 30 and refers to heavy-handed
apostates who would “speak twisted things” and seek to mislead
others.
“This Is What the Love of God Means”

13

does not ask us to observe commandments that are
too di?cult to ful?ll. (Deuteronomy 30:11-14) He
would never ask us to carry such a heavy burden.
Jehovah understands our limitations, for “he well
knows how we are formed, remembering that we are
dust.”—Psalm 103:14.
15

Jehovah’s commandments are far from being

burdensome; they are for our greatest good. (Read
Isaiah 48:17.) Moses could thus tell Israel of old: “Jehovah commanded us to carry out all these regulations and to fear Jehovah our God for our lasting
good, so that we could keep alive, as we are today.”
(Deuteronomy 6:24) We too can be con?dent that in
giving us his laws, Jehovah has our best interests
at heart—our long-term, everlasting welfare. Really,
how could it be otherwise? Jehovah is a God of in?nite wisdom. (Romans 11:33) He therefore knows
what is best for us. Jehovah is also the personi?cation of love. (1 John 4:8) Love, his very essence, in?uences everything he says and does. It is the basis
15. Why can we be con?dent that Jehovah’s commandments are for
our greatest good?
14

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

for all the commandments that he places upon his
servants.
16

This is not to say that obedience to God is an

easy course to follow. We must ?ght against the in?uences of this debased world, which “is lying in the
power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19) We must
also contend with the imperfect ?esh, which inclines
us toward violating God’s laws. (Romans 7:21-25)
But our love for God can win out. Jehovah blesses
those who want to prove their love for him by their
obedience. He gives his holy spirit “to those obeying
him as ruler.” (Acts 5:32) That spirit produces beautiful fruitage in us—precious qualities that can aid
us in pursuing an obedient course.—Galatians 5:
22, 23.
17

In this publication, we will examine Jehovah’s

principles and moral standards and many other indications of his will. As we do, we need to keep a number of important things in mind. Let us remember
16. Despite the in?uences of this debased world and the tendencies of
the imperfect ?esh, why can we pursue an obedient course?
17, 18. (a) What will we examine in this publication, and as we do,
what should we keep in mind? (b) What will be discussed in the next
chapter?
“This Is What the Love of God Means”

15

that Jehovah does not force us to obey his laws and
principles; he wants willing obedience that stems
from our heart. Let us not forget that Jehovah is asking us to live in a way that will bring rich blessings
now and lead to everlasting life in the future. And
let us see our wholehearted obedience for what it is
—a precious opportunity to show Jehovah just how
much we love him.
18

To help us discern right from wrong, Jehovah

has lovingly endowed us with the faculty of conscience. Yet, to be a reliable guide, our conscience
needs to be trained, as the next chapter will discuss.

HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
? What kind of obedience does Jehovah expect
from his worshippers, and why is this in our
best interests?—Deuteronomy 5:28-33.
? How seriously does Jehovah take our obedience?—1 Samuel 15:22, 23.
? What lesson can we learn from Jesus’ attitude
toward obedience to God?—John 8:29.
? Why is it only right that we obey Jehovah?
—Revelation 4:11.
16

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 2

How Can You Maintain
a Good Conscience?
“Maintain a good conscience.”
—1 PETER 3:16.

A MARINER steers his ship through the waves of a
vast ocean; a hiker treks across a lonely wilderness;
an aviator guides his aircraft as it soars above layers
of clouds that stretch from one horizon to the other. Do you know what these individuals have in common? Each in his own way might be in big trouble
without a compass—especially if other modern technology is not accessible.
2

A compass is a simple instrument, usually just a

dial with a magnetic needle that points northward.
When it is working properly and especially when it
is used in conjunction with an accurate map, it can
be a lifesaver. In some ways, it may be likened
to a precious gift that Jehovah has given us—a
1, 2. Why is a compass a vital instrument, and how may it be likened
to the conscience?
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

17

conscience. (James 1:17) Without a conscience, we
would be hopelessly lost. Used properly, it can help
us ?nd our way and keep to the right path in life. So
let us consider what the conscience is and how it
works. Then we can discuss these points: (1) How
the conscience may be trained, (2) why we should
consider the consciences of others, and (3) how
maintaining a good conscience brings blessings.

3

WHAT THE CONS CIENCE IS
AND HOW IT WORKS
In the Bible, the Greek word for “conscience” lit-

erally means “co-knowledge, or knowledge with oneself.” Unlike all other earthly creatures, we possess
a God-given capacity to know ourselves. We can, in
a sense, stand back and look at ourselves and make
moral judgments. Acting as an internal witness bearer, or judge, our conscience can examine our actions,
our attitudes, and our choices. It may guide us toward a good decision or warn us against a bad one.
Afterward, it may comfort us for choosing well or
punish us with sharp pangs for choosing poorly.
3. What is the literal meaning of the Greek word for “conscience,”
and what unique capacity in humans does it describe?
18

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

4

This faculty was built into man and woman from

the very beginning. Adam and Eve each showed that
they had a conscience. We see evidence to that e?ect
in the shame they experienced following their sin.
(Genesis 3:7, 8) Sadly, a troubled conscience could
do them no good by then. They had deliberately ignored God’s law. Thus they knowingly chose to become rebels, opponents of Jehovah God. As perfect
humans, they knew what they were doing, and there
was no turning back.
5

Unlike Adam and Eve, many imperfect humans

have heeded their conscience. For example, the faithful man Job was able to say: “I will maintain my
righteousness and never let it go; my heart will not
condemn me as long as I live.”1 (Job 27:6) Job was
truly a conscientious man. He was careful to listen
1 No speci?c word for “conscience” appears in the Hebrew Scriptures. However, the conscience is clearly in evidence in such
examples as this one. The expression “heart” generally refers to the
inner person. In such instances as this, it evidently points to a speci?c part of the inner man—his conscience. In the Christian Greek
Scriptures, the Greek word rendered “conscience” occurs some 30
times.

4, 5. (a) How do we know that Adam and Eve each had a conscience,
and what resulted because they ignored God’s law? (b) What examples
show the conscience at work in faithful men of pre-Christian times?
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

19

to his conscience, letting it guide his actions and decisions. Thus, he could say with real satisfaction that
his conscience did not condemn him with shame and
guilt. Notice the contrast between Job and David.
When David showed disrespect for Saul, Jehovah’s
anointed king, “afterward David’s heart kept striking
him.” (1 Samuel 24:5) Those sharp pangs of conscience surely bene?ted David, teaching him to avoid
such disrespect thereafter.
Does this gift of conscience belong exclusively to
servants of Jehovah? Consider the apostle Paul’s inspired words: “When people of the nations, who do
not have law, do by nature the things of the law,
these people, although not having law, are a law to
themselves. They are the very ones who demonstrate
the matter of the law to be written in their hearts,
while their conscience is bearing witness with them,
and by their own thoughts they are being accused or
even excused.” (Romans 2:14, 15) Even those who are
completely unfamiliar with Jehovah’s laws may at
times be moved by this internal witness bearer to act
in harmony with divine principles.
6

6. What shows that the conscience is a gift to all mankind?
20

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

However, the conscience may in some cases be
wrong. Why? Well, if a compass is placed near a metal object, it may be in?uenced to point in a direction
7

other than north. And if it is used without an accurate map, the compass may be nearly worthless. Similarly, if unduly in?uenced by the sel?sh desires of
our heart, our conscience may point us in the wrong
direction. And if it is used without the sure guidance
of God’s Word, we may be unable to distinguish between right and wrong in many important matters.
Really, in order for our conscience to work properly, we need the guidance of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
Paul wrote: “My conscience bears witness with me
in holy spirit.” (Romans 9:1) How, though, can we
make sure that our conscience is in harmony with
Jehovah’s holy spirit? It is a matter of training.

8

HOW THE CONS CIENCE
MAY BE TRAINED
How do you make a decision that is based on con-

science? Some, it seems, simply look within, examine
7. Why may the conscience be wrong at times?
8. (a) How may the heart a?ect the conscience, and what should matter most in our decisions? (b) Why is a clear conscience not always
su?cient for a Christian? (See footnote.)
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

21

their feelings, and decide what to do. They may then
say, “Well, it doesn’t bother my conscience.” The desires of the heart can be very strong, even swaying
the conscience. The Bible says: “The heart is more
treacherous than anything else and is desperate.
Who can know it?” (Jeremiah 17:9) What our heart
desires, then, should not be the most important consideration. Rather, we want to consider ?rst what
will please Jehovah God.1
9

If a decision is truly based on our trained con-

science, it will re?ect our godly fear, not our personal desires. Consider a case in point. The faithful
governor Nehemiah had a right to exact certain payments and dues from the people in Jerusalem. Yet,
he held back. Why? He hated the very thought of
risking Jehovah’s displeasure by oppressing God’s
people. He said: “I did not do that because of the
1 The Bible shows that having a clear conscience is not always suf?cient. For example, Paul said: “I am not conscious of anything
against myself. But by this I am not proved righteous; the one
who examines me is Jehovah.” (1 Corinthians 4:4) Even those who
persecute Christians, as Paul once did, may do so with a clear conscience because they think that God approves of their course. It is
vital that our conscience be both clear in our eyes and clean in
God’s eyes.—Acts 23:1; 2 Timothy 1:3.

9. What is godly fear, and how may our having it a?ect our conscience?
22

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

fear of God.” (Nehemiah 5:15) Sincere godly fear, a
wholehearted fear of displeasing our heavenly Father, is essential. Such reverential fear will move us
to seek direction from God’s Word when we have decisions to make.
10

For instance, consider the matter of alcoholic

beverages. Here is a decision that many of us face in
social settings, Will I drink or not? First, we need to
educate ourselves. What Bible principles bear on the
matter? Well, the Bible does not condemn the moderate use of alcohol. It praises Jehovah for the gift
of wine. (Psalm 104:14, 15) However, the Bible condemns heavy drinking and wild parties. (Luke 21:34;
Romans 13:13) Moreover, it lists drunkenness among
other very serious sins, such as sexual immorality.1
—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.
11

A Christian’s conscience is educated and sensi-

tized by such principles. So when we face a decision
about drinking at a gathering, we ask ourselves such
1 It should be noted that many doctors say that controlled drinking is not really possible for alcoholics; for them, “moderation”
means not drinking.

10, 11. What Bible principles bear on the matter of drinking alcoholic beverages, and how may we get God’s guidance in applying them?
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

23

questions as these: ‘What kind of gathering is being
organized? Is it likely to get out of hand, becoming
a wild party? What are my own tendencies? Do I
long for alcohol, depend on it, use it to control my
moods and behavior? Do I have the self-control
needed to limit my drinking?’ As we ponder Bible
principles and the questions they evoke, we do well
to pray for Jehovah’s guidance. (Read Psalm 139:23,
24.) In this way, we are inviting Jehovah to guide us
with his holy spirit. We are also training our conscience to be in tune with divine principles. There is
another factor, though, that should weigh in our decisions.
WHY CONSIDER THE
CONS CIENCES OF OTHERS?
12 You may ?nd yourself surprised at times by the
degree to which Christian consciences di?er. One
person ?nds a practice or custom objectionable; another enjoys it and sees no basis for condemning it.
In the matter of social drinking, for example, one
?nds delight in having a drink with a few friends as
they relax together for an evening; another is trou12, 13. What are some reasons why Christian consciences di?er, and
how should we deal with such di?erences?
24

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

bled by the practice. Why are there such di?erences,
and how should they a?ect our decisions?
13 People di?er for many reasons. Backgrounds
vary greatly. Some, for instance, are acutely aware
of a weakness that they have struggled with in the
past—perhaps not always successfully. (1 Kings 8:
38, 39) When it comes to alcohol, such individuals
would likely feel particularly sensitive. If such a person comes to your home for a visit, his conscience
may rightly move him to refuse the o?er of a drink.
Will you be o?ended? Will you insist? No. Whether
you know his reasons or not—reasons that he may
choose to keep private in this setting—brotherly love
will move you to be considerate.
14 The apostle Paul saw that consciences often varied widely among Christians in the ?rst century.
Back then, some Christians were troubled about certain foods that had been sacri?ced to idols. (1 Corinthians 10:25) Paul’s conscience did not object to
such foods that were subsequently sold at markets.
To him, idols were nothing; idols could never own
food that originated with Jehovah and belonged to
14, 15. Over what issue did the consciences of those in the ?rstcentury congregation di?er, and what did Paul recommend?
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

25

Him anyway. Yet, Paul understood that others did
not share his view of this matter. Some might have
been deeply involved with idolatry before becoming
Christians. To them, anything even formerly connected with idolatry was o?ensive. The solution?
15

Paul said: “We, though, who are strong ought to

bear the weaknesses of those not strong, and not to
be pleasing ourselves. For even the Christ did not
please himself.” (Romans 15:1, 3) Paul reasoned that
we should put the needs of our brothers ahead of
our own, just as Christ did. In a related discussion,
Paul said that he would rather not eat meat at all
than stumble a precious sheep for whom Christ had
given his life.—Read 1 Corinthians 8:13; 10:23, 24,
31-33.
16

On the other hand, those with a more restrictive

conscience should not be critical of others, insisting
that all view matters of conscience just as they do.
(Read Romans 14:10.) Really, the conscience is best
used as an internal judge, not as a license to judge
others. Remember Jesus’ words: “Stop judging that
16. Why should those with a more restrictive conscience avoid judging
those whose conscience di?ers from theirs?
26

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

you may not be judged.” (Matthew 7:1) All in the
congregation want to avoid making an issue of personal matters of conscience. Instead, we seek ways
to promote love and unity, building one another up,
not tearing one another down.—Romans 14:19.
HOW A G O OD CONS CIENCE
BRINGS BLES SINGS
17 The apostle Peter wrote: “Maintain a good conscience.” (1 Peter 3:16) A conscience that is clean in
the sight of Jehovah God is a tremendous blessing.
It is not like the consciences of so many today. Paul
described those “whose conscience is seared as with
a branding iron.” (1 Timothy 4:2) A branding iron
sears the ?esh, leaving it scarred and insensitive.
Many have a conscience that is, in e?ect, dead—so
scarred and insensitive that it no longer sends out
warnings, protests, or pangs of shame or guilt over
wrongdoing. “Good riddance,” many today seem to
say to such feelings as guilt.
18

In truth, feelings of guilt can be the conscience’s

17. What has happened to the consciences of many today?
18, 19. (a) Feelings of guilt or shame may have what value? (b) What
can we do if our conscience continues to punish us for past sins for
which we have already repented?
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

27

way of telling us that we have done wrong. When
such feelings move a sinner to repent, even the worst
of sins may be forgiven. King David, for example, became guilty of grave wrongdoing but was forgiven
largely because of his sincere repentance. His hatred
of his wrong course and his determination to obey
Jehovah’s laws from then on led him to see ?rsthand
that Jehovah is “good and ready to forgive.” (Psalm
51:1-19; 86:5) What, though, if intense feelings of
guilt and shame persist after we have repented and
have received forgiveness?
19

Sometimes the conscience can be overly puni-

tive, beating a sinner with guilt long after such feelings stop serving any useful purpose. In such cases,
we may need to assure the self-condemning heart
that Jehovah is greater than all human feelings. We
need to believe in and accept his love and forgiveness, just as we encourage others to do. (Read 1 John
3:19, 20.) On the other hand, a cleansed conscience
brings inner peace, serenity, and a profound joy that
is rarely found in this world. Many who were once
involved in serious sin have experienced this marvel28

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ous relief and are able today to maintain a good conscience as they serve Jehovah God.—1 Corinthians
6:11.
20

This book is designed to help you ?nd that joy,

to maintain a good conscience throughout the rest
of these troubled last days of Satan’s system of
things. Of course, it cannot cover all the Bible’s laws
and principles that you need to think about and apply in the situations that arise day by day. Furthermore, do not expect simple, black-and-white rules on
matters of conscience. The purpose of this book is
to help you educate and sensitize your conscience by
studying how to apply God’s Word in your daily life.
Unlike the Mosaic Law, “the law of the Christ” invites its adherents to live more by conscience and
principle than by written rules. (Galatians 6:2) Jehovah thus entrusts Christians with extraordinary freedom. However, his Word reminds us never to use
that freedom as “a cover for doing wrong.” (1 Peter
2:16) Rather, such freedom a?ords us a marvelous
opportunity to express our love for Jehovah.
20, 21. (a) What is this publication designed to help you to do? (b) As
Christians, we enjoy what freedom, yet how should we use it?
How Can You Maintain a Good Conscience?

29

21

By prayerfully considering how best to live by

Bible principles and then putting your decisions to
work, you will continue a vital process that began
when you ?rst came to know Jehovah. Your “powers
of discernment” will be trained “through use.” (Hebrews 5:14) Your Bible-trained conscience will be a
blessing to you every day of your life. Like the compass that guides the traveler, your conscience will
help you to make decisions that please your heavenly Father. This is a sure way to keep yourself in
God’s love.

HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
? How should our conscience be in?uenced by
the knowledge that Jehovah is watching over
us at all times?—Hebrews 4:13.
? How did Joseph’s conscience help him to resist
temptation?—Genesis 39:1, 2, 7-12.
? Why is a clean conscience essential in order to
approach Jehovah?—Hebrews 10:22.
? Why should we be concerned about the consciences of unbelievers?—2 Corinthians 4:1, 2.
30

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 3

Love Those Whom God Loves
“The one walking with the wise will
become wise.” —PROVERBS 13:20.
IN A way, people are like sponges; they tend to absorb
whatever surrounds them. It is all too easy to adopt
—even unwittingly—the attitudes, standards, and personality traits of those with whom we have close association.
2

The Bible expresses an inescapable truth when it

says: “The one walking with the wise will become wise,
but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare
badly.” (Proverbs 13:20) This proverb speaks about
more than casual contact. The expression “walking
with” suggests ongoing association.1 Commenting on
this verse, one Bible reference work says: “To walk with
a person implies love and attachment.” Would you not
1 The Hebrew word rendered “has dealings with” is also rendered
“to accompany” and “keep company.”—Judges 14:20; Proverbs
22:24.

1-3. (a) What inescapable truth does the Bible express? (b) How can
we choose associates who will in?uence us for the good?
Love Those Whom God Loves

31

agree that we tend to imitate those we love? Indeed,
because we attach ourselves emotionally to those we
love, they can have a molding e?ect on us—for good or
for bad.
3

To remain in God’s love, it is vital that we seek out

associates who will in?uence us for the good. How
can we do that? Put simply, we can do so by loving those whom God loves, making his friends our
friends. Think about it. What better associates could
we choose than those who have the qualities that Jehovah looks for in his friends? Let us, then, examine the
kind of people who are loved by God. With Jehovah’s
viewpoint clearly in mind, we will be better equipped
to choose wholesome associates.

THO SE WHOM G OD LOVES
4 When it comes to friendship, Jehovah is particular.
Does he not have the right to be? After all, he is
the Sovereign Lord of the universe, and friendship
with him is the greatest of all privileges. Whom, then,
does he choose as his friends? Jehovah draws close to
those who trust in him and put their full faith in him.
4. Why does Jehovah have the right to be particular about his friends,
and why did Jehovah refer to Abraham as “my friend”?
32

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Consider, for example, the patriarch Abraham, a man
known for his outstanding faith. It is hard to imagine
a greater test of faith for a human father than to be
asked to o?er up his son as a sacri?ce.1 Yet, Abraham
“as good as o?ered up Isaac,” having full faith that
“God was able to raise him up even from the dead.”
(Hebrews 11:17-19) Because Abraham displayed such
faith and obedience, Jehovah a?ectionately referred to
him as “my friend.”—Isaiah 41:8; James 2:21-23.
5

Jehovah places a high value on loyal obedience. He

loves those who are willing to put loyalty to him above
all else. (Read 2 Samuel 22:26.) As we saw in Chapter 1
of this publication, Jehovah ?nds great pleasure in
those who choose to obey him out of love. “His close
friendship,” says Proverbs 3:32, “is with the upright.”
Those who loyally meet God’s requirements receive a
gracious invitation from Jehovah: They can be guests
in his “tent”—welcomed to worship him and granted
free access to him in prayer.—Psalm 15:1-5.
1 By asking this of Abraham, Jehovah provided a glimpse of the
sacri?ce he himself would make in o?ering up his only-begotten
Son. (John 3:16) In Abraham’s case, Jehovah intervened and provided a ram as a substitute for Isaac.—Genesis 22:1, 2, 9-13.

5. How does Jehovah view those who loyally obey him?
Love Those Whom God Loves

33

Jehovah loves those who love Jesus, his onlybegotten Son. Jesus said: “If anyone loves me, he will
observe my word, and my Father will love him, and we
will come to him and make our dwelling with him.”
(John 14:23) How can we show our love for Jesus?
Surely by observing his commandments, including the
commission to preach the good news and make disciples. (Matthew 28:19, 20; John 14:15, 21) We also show
our love for Jesus when we “follow his steps closely,”
imitating him in word and deed to the best of our ability as imperfect humans. (1 Peter 2:21) Jehovah’s heart
is touched by the e?orts of those whose love for his
Son moves them to pursue a Christlike course.
6

Faith, loyalty, obedience, and love for Jesus and
his ways—these are among the qualities that Jehovah
looks for in His friends. Each of us does well to ask
himself: ‘Are such qualities and ways evident in my
close associates? Have I made Jehovah’s friends my
friends?’ It is wise to do so. Individuals who cultivate
godly qualities and preach the Kingdom good news
with zeal can have a positive e?ect on us, in?uencing
7

6. How can we show that we love Jesus, and how does Jehovah feel
about those who love his Son?
7. Why is it wise to befriend Jehovah’s friends?
34

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

us to live up to our determination to please God.—See
the box “What Is a Good Friend?” on page 37.

LEARNING FROM A BIBLE EXAMPLE
8 The Scriptures contain many examples of those
who bene?ted as a result of choosing wholesome associates. You can read about the relationship between
Naomi and her daughter-in-law Ruth, between the
three young Hebrews who stuck together in Babylon,
and between Paul and Timothy. (Ruth 1:16; Daniel 3:
17, 18; 1 Corinthians 4:17; Philippians 2:20-22) Let us,
though, focus on another outstanding example: the
friendship between David and Jonathan.
9 The Bible says that after David slew Goliath, “Jonathan and David became bound together in close friendship, and Jonathan began to love him as himself.”
(1 Samuel 18:1) Thus began an unbreakable friendship
that despite a signi?cant age di?erence, persisted until
Jonathan’s death on the battle?eld.1 (2 Samuel 1:26)
1 David was a youth—“but a boy”—when he felled Goliath and
was about 30 at the time of Jonathan’s death. (1 Samuel 17:33; 31:2;
2 Samuel 5:4) Jonathan, who was about 60 when he died, was evidently some 30 years older than David.

8. What impresses you about the relationship between (a) Naomi and
Ruth? (b) the three young Hebrews? (c) Paul and Timothy?
9, 10. What was the basis of the friendship between David and Jonathan?
Love Those Whom God Loves

35

What was the basis of the strong bond forged between
these two friends?
10 David and Jonathan were bound together by their
love for God and their strong desire to remain faithful
to him. These two men shared a spiritual bond. Each
displayed qualities that endeared him to the other. Jonathan no doubt was impressed with the courage and
zeal of the young man who fearlessly defended Jehovah’s name. David undoubtedly respected the older
man who loyally supported Jehovah’s arrangements
and unsel?shly put David’s interests ahead of his own.
Consider, for example, what happened when David
was at a low point in his life, living as a fugitive in the
wilderness to escape the wrath of wicked King Saul,
Jonathan’s father. In a remarkable demonstration of
loyalty, Jonathan took the initiative and “went out to
David . . . , and he helped him ?nd strength in Jehovah.” (1 Samuel 23:16) Imagine how David must have
felt when his dear friend came and o?ered him support
and encouragement!1
1 As recorded at 1 Samuel 23:17, Jonathan said ?ve things to encourage David: (1) He urged David not to be afraid. (2) He assured
David that Saul’s e?orts would fail. (3) He reminded David that he
would receive the kingship, as God had promised. (4) He pledged
his loyalty to David. (5) He told David that even Saul was aware
of Jonathan’s loyalty to David.
36

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

What do we learn from the example of Jonathan
and David? Above all, we see that the most important
thing for friends to have in common is spiritual values.
When we draw close to those who share our beliefs,
our moral values, and our desire to remain faithful to
God, there can be an interchange of thoughts, feelings, and experiences that encourage and upbuild us.
11

11. What do you learn about friendship from the example of Jonathan
and David?

WHAT IS A G O OD FRIEND?
Principle: “A true friend shows love at all
times, and is a brother who is born for times of
distress.”—Proverbs 17:17.
Some questions to ask yourself
? Are my friends also friends of Jehovah and Jesus?—John 15:14, 16; James 2:23.
? Do my friends help me to develop good habits?
—1 Corinthians 15:33.
? Do my friends love me enough to correct me if
necessary?—Psalm 141:5; Proverbs 27:6.
? What do my speech and actions reveal about
the type of friend I am to others?—Proverbs 12:
18; 18:24; 1 John 3:16-18.
Love Those Whom God Loves

37

HOW WE MADE G O OD FRIENDS
? “At ?rst, I found it di?cult to make friends in
the congregation. But I discovered that having an
active share in the ministry helped me to develop
such qualities as patience, endurance, and selfsacri?cing love. As I continue to develop these
qualities, I ?nd that like-minded people are attracted to me, and I now have some good friends.”
—Shivani.
? “I prayed that I could ?nd friends inside the
congregation. But for a long time, I felt that my
prayers were not being answered. I eventually
realized that I wasn’t really doing anything to
make friends. I wasn’t taking the initiative. Since I
began acting in harmony with my prayers, however, I de?nitely feel that Jehovah has answered
them.”—Ryan.
(Read Romans 1:11, 12.) We ?nd such spiritually-minded
associates among fellow worshippers. Does this mean,
though, that everyone who comes to meetings at the
Kingdom Hall is a good associate? No, not necessarily.
12

CHO O SING OUR CLO SE AS S O CIATES
Even within the congregation, we must be selec-

12, 13. (a) Why must we be selective in choosing associates even
from among fellow Christians? (b) What challenge did ?rst-century
congregations face, prompting Paul to give what strong warnings?
38

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tive if our associates are to be spiritually upbuilding.
Should this surprise us? Not really. Some Christians in
the congregation may take longer to reach spiritual maturity, even as some fruit on a tree may take longer to
ripen. Thus, in any given congregation, we ?nd Christians who are at di?erent levels of spiritual growth.
(Hebrews 5:12–6:3) Of course, we show patience and
love to newer or weaker ones, for we want to help them
to grow spiritually.—Romans 14:1; 15:1.
Occasionally, there may be a situation in the congregation that calls for us to watch our association.
Some individuals might engage in questionable conduct. Others may develop a bitter or complaining spirit. Congregations in the ?rst century C.E. faced a
similar challenge. While most members were faithful,
some individuals did not conduct themselves aright.
Because some in the congregation in Corinth did not
uphold certain Christian teachings, the apostle Paul
warned the congregation: “Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.” (1 Corinthians 15:12, 33)
Paul cautioned Timothy that even among fellow Christians, there might be some who do not act honorably. Timothy was told to keep clear of such ones, not
13

Love Those Whom God Loves

39

making them his close associates.—Read 2 Timothy 2:
20-22.
How can we apply the principle behind Paul’s
warnings? By avoiding close association with anyone
—inside or outside the congregation—who could be a
corrupting in?uence. (2 Thessalonians 3:6, 7, 14) We
must protect our spirituality. Remember that like a
sponge, we absorb the attitudes and ways of our close
friends. Just as we cannot submerge a sponge in vinegar and expect it to ?ll with water, so we cannot associate with those who exert a negative in?uence and expect to absorb what is positive.—1 Corinthians 5:6.
14

Thankfully, the potential for ?nding wholesome
associates among fellow worshippers is great indeed.
(Psalm 133:1) How can you ?nd spiritually-minded
friends in the congregation? As you cultivate godly
qualities and ways, no doubt others of like mind will be
drawn to you. At the same time, you may need to
take some practical steps to reach out and make new
friends. (See the box “How We Made Good Friends,”
15

14. How can we apply the principle behind Paul’s warnings about associations?
15. What can you do to ?nd spiritually-minded friends in the congregation?
40

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

on page 38.) Look for those who display the qualities
you want to re?ect. Heed the Bible’s counsel to “open
your hearts wide,” seeking out friendships with fellow
believers regardless of race, nationality, or culture.
(2 Corinthians 6:13; read 1 Peter 2:17.) Do not limit
yourself to those of your own age group. Remember
that Jonathan was much older than David. Many older
ones can bring to friendship a rich supply of experience and wisdom.

WHEN DIFFICULTIES ARISE
16 Problems may arise from time to time because of
the wide variety of personalities and backgrounds in
the congregation. A fellow believer might say or do
something that hurts our feelings. (Proverbs 12:18)
Sometimes di?culties are fueled by personality clashes, misunderstandings, or di?erences of opinion. Will
we stumble over such challenges and keep away from
the congregation? Not if we have genuine love for Jehovah and for those whom he loves.
17

As our Creator and Life-Sustainer, Jehovah de-

serves our love and complete devotion. (Revelation
16, 17. If a fellow worshipper hurts us in some way, why should we
not withdraw from the congregation?
Love Those Whom God Loves

41

4:11) In addition, the congregation that he is pleased to
use deserves our loyal support. (Hebrews 13:17) So if
a fellow worshipper hurts us or disappoints us in some
way, we will not withdraw from the congregation as a
means of protest. How could we? Jehovah is not the
one who o?ended us. Our love for Jehovah could never allow us to turn our back on him and his people!
—Read Psalm 119:165.
18

Love for fellow worshippers moves us to promote

peace in the congregation. Jehovah does not expect
perfection from those he loves, and neither should we.
Love enables us to overlook minor trespasses and to
remember that we are all imperfect and make mistakes. (Proverbs 17:9; 1 Peter 4:8) Love helps us to continue “forgiving one another freely.” (Colossians 3:13)
It is not always easy to apply this counsel. If we allow
negative emotions to get the better of us, we may be inclined to hold on to resentment, perhaps feeling that
our anger is somehow punishing the o?ender. In reality, though, holding on to resentment is harmful to us.
18. (a) What can we do to promote peace in the congregation?
(b) Choosing to forgive when there is a sound basis for doing so brings
what blessings?
42

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Choosing to forgive when there is a sound basis for doing so brings rich blessings. (Luke 17:3, 4) It gives us
peace of mind and heart, preserves peace in the congregation and, above all, safeguards our relationship
with Jehovah.—Matthew 6:14, 15; Romans 14:19.

WHEN TO WITHDRAW FELLOWSHIP
19 At times, we are called upon to withdraw our fellowship from one who has been a member of the congregation. This situation arises when an individual
who unrepentantly violates God’s law is disfellowshipped or when one rejects the faith by teaching false
doctrine or by disassociating himself from the congregation. God’s Word plainly tells us to “stop keeping
company” with such ones.1 (Read 1 Corinthians 5:11-13;
2 John 9-11) It may be a real challenge to avoid someone who had perhaps been a friend or who is related to
us. Will we take a ?rm stand, thereby showing that we
put loyalty to Jehovah and his righteous laws above all
else? Remember that Jehovah places a high value on
loyalty and obedience.
1 For more information on how to treat disfellowshipped or disassociated ones, see the Appendix, pages 267-269.

19. What situations may arise that make it necessary for us to withdraw our fellowship from someone?
Love Those Whom God Loves

43

20

The disfellowshipping arrangement is really a lov-

ing provision from Jehovah. How so? Expelling an unrepentant sinner shows love for Jehovah’s holy name
and all that it stands for. (1 Peter 1:15, 16) Disfellowshipping keeps the congregation safe. Faithful members are protected from the unwholesome in?uence of
willful sinners and can go about their worship knowing that the congregation is a safe haven from this
wicked world. (1 Corinthians 5:7; Hebrews 12:15, 16)
The strong discipline shows love for the wrongdoer. It
may be just the jolt he needs to come to his senses and
take the steps necessary to return to Jehovah.—Hebrews 12:11.
21

We cannot escape the fact that our close associates

can have a powerful, molding e?ect on us. It is vital,
then, that we choose our associates wisely. By making
Jehovah’s friends our friends, by loving those whom
God loves, we will surround ourselves with the best
possible associates. What we absorb from them will
help us to live up to our determination to please Jehovah.
20, 21. (a) Why is the disfellowshipping arrangement a loving one?
(b) Why is it vital that we choose our associates wisely?
44

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 4

Why Respect Authority?
“Honor men of all sorts.”
—1 PETER 2:17.

HAVE you ever watched a small child react when he
is asked to do something he really does not want to
do? You may see quite a con?ict written plainly on
that little boy’s face. He hears his parent’s voice, and
he knows that he is supposed to respect his parent’s
authority. But in this case, he just does not want to
obey. His struggle illustrates a truth we all face.
Respect for authority does not always come easily to us. Do you sometimes ?nd it di?cult to respect
those who have a measure of authority over you? If
so, you are not alone in this struggle. We live at a
time when respect for authority seems to be at an
all-time low. Yet, the Bible says that we need to show
respect for those who hold positions of authority
over us. (Proverbs 24:21) In fact, doing so is essential if we want to remain in God’s love. Naturally,
2

1, 2. (a) What struggle do we face when it comes to authority?
(b) What questions will we consider?
Why Respect Authority?

45

then, some questions arise. Why can it be so di?cult
for us to respect authority? Why does Jehovah ask
this of us, and what will help us to comply? Finally,
in what ways can we show respect for authority?
3

WHY IT IS A CHALLENGE
Let us brie?y consider two reasons why it can be

such a challenge for us to show respect for those in
authority. First, imperfection a?icts us; second, it
a?icts those humans in authority over us. Human
sin and imperfection got their start a long time ago,
back in the garden of Eden when Adam and Eve rebelled against God’s authority. So sin began with rebellion. To this day, we have an inborn tendency to
rebel.—Genesis 2:15-17; 3:1-7; Psalm 51:5; Romans
5:12.
4

Because of our sinful nature, pride and haughti-

ness arise easily in most of us, whereas humility is a
rare quality that we need to work hard to cultivate
and maintain. Even after years of faithful service to
God, we may give in to stubbornness and pride. For
example, consider Korah, who faithfully stuck with
3, 4. How did sin and imperfection begin, and why does our sinful nature make it a challenge for us to respect authority?
46

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Jehovah’s people through many hardships. Still, he
craved more authority and brazenly led a rebellion
against Moses, the meekest man alive at that time.
(Numbers 12:3; 16:1-3) Think, too, of King Uzziah,
whose pride led him to enter Jehovah’s temple and
carry out a sacred duty reserved for the priests.
(2 Chronicles 26:16-21) Such men paid dearly for
their rebellion. Yet, their negative examples are useful reminders for all of us. We need to combat the
pride that makes it di?cult for us to respect authority.
On the other hand, imperfect humans in positions of power have done much to undermine respect for authority. Many have been cruel, abusive,
or tyrannical. In fact, human history is largely a record of the abuse of power. (Read Ecclesiastes 8:9.)
For example, Saul was a good, humble man when
Jehovah chose him to be king. However, he succumbed to pride and jealousy; he then persecuted
the faithful man David. (1 Samuel 9:20, 21; 10:20-22;
18:7-11) David later became one of the best kings
Israel ever had, yet he misused his power when he
5

5. How have imperfect humans misused their authority?
Why Respect Authority?

47

stole the wife of Uriah the Hittite and sent that innocent man to the front lines to be killed in battle.
(2 Samuel 11:1-17) Yes, imperfection makes it hard
for people to handle power well. And when those in
power do not respect Jehovah, they do even worse.
After describing the way that some Catholic popes
instituted widespread persecution, a British statesman wrote: “Power tends to corrupt, and absolute
power corrupts absolutely.” With such a record in
mind, let us consider the question: Why should we
respect authority?
WHY RESPECT AUTHORITY?
6 The best reasons to respect authority spring from
love—our love for Jehovah, for our fellow man, and
even for ourselves. Because we love Jehovah above
all else, we want to make his heart rejoice. (Read
Proverbs 27:11; Mark 12:29, 30.) We know that his
sovereignty, his right to rule the universe, has been
challenged on earth ever since the rebellion in Eden
and that the majority of mankind have sided with Satan and rejected Jehovah’s rule. We are thrilled to
6, 7. (a) What does our love for Jehovah move us to do, and why?
(b) What attitude does submission involve, and how may we show it?
48

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

take the opposite stand. When we read the majestic
words of Revelation 4:11, they strike a chord in our
heart. How clear it is to us that Jehovah is the rightful Ruler of the universe! We embrace Jehovah’s sovereignty, accepting his rule in our day-to-day life.
Such respect means obedience and more. We
obey Jehovah readily because we love him. However,
there are bound to be times when obedience will be
very di?cult for us. At such times we, like that little
boy described at the outset, will need to learn submission. We recall that Jesus submitted to his Father’s will even when doing so could seem very challenging. “Let, not my will, but yours take place,” he
said to his Father.—Luke 22:42.
7

Of course, Jehovah does not speak to us individually today; he uses his Word and human representatives on earth. Most often, then, we show submission
to Jehovah’s authority by respecting those humans
he has placed, or has allowed to continue, in positions of authority over us. If we were to rebel against
8

8. (a) Submission to Jehovah’s authority today often involves what,
and what reveals Jehovah’s feelings in this regard? (b) What can help
us to listen to counsel and accept discipline? (See the box on pages 59-61.)
Why Respect Authority?

49

those humans—for example, by refusing to accept
their Scriptural counsel and correction—we would
o?end our God. When the Israelites murmured and
rebelled against Moses, Jehovah took their actions
personally as directed against him.—Numbers 14:
26, 27.
9

We also show respect for authority out of love for

our fellow man. How so? Well, imagine that you are
a soldier in an army. The success, even the very survival of the army, likely depends on each soldier’s
cooperation with, obedience to, and respect for the
chain of command. If you were to undermine that
organization by rebelling, all your fellow soldiers
might well be placed in danger. Granted, human armies wreak terrible havoc in the world today. However, Jehovah has armies that do only good. The Bible refers to God hundreds of times as “Jehovah of
armies.” (1 Samuel 1:3) He is the Commander of a
vast array of mighty spirit creatures. At times, Jehovah likens his earthly servants to an army. (Psalm
9. Why will our love for our fellow man move us to respect authority?
Illustrate.
50

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

68:11; Ezekiel 37:1-10) If we were to rebel against the
humans that Jehovah has put in authority over us,
might we not be putting our fellow spiritual soldiers
at risk? When a Christian rebels against appointed
elders, others in the congregation may su?er as well.
(1 Corinthians 12:14, 25, 26) When a child rebels, the
whole family may su?er. So we show our love for our
fellow man by developing a respectful and cooperative spirit.
10

We also respect authority because it is in our

own best interests to do so. When Jehovah asks us
to respect authority, he often mentions the bene?ts
that will come to us for doing so. For instance, he
tells children to obey their parents in order to live
a long and good life. (Deuteronomy 5:16; Ephesians
6:2, 3) He tells us to respect congregation elders because failure to do so will cause us spiritual harm.
(Hebrews 13:7, 17) And he tells us to obey secular
authorities for our own protection.—Romans 13:4.
11

Would you not agree that knowing why Jehovah

10, 11. How does a proper desire to bene?t ourselves move us to be
obedient to authority?
Why Respect Authority?

51

wants us to obey helps us to respect authority? Let
us, then, consider how we can show respect for authority in three principal areas of life.

12

RESPECT IN THE FAMILY
Jehovah himself designed the family arrange-

ment. Ever the God of order, he has organized the
family so that it can work well. (1 Corinthians 14:33)
He gives the husband and father authority to act as
family head. The husband shows respect for his
Head, Christ Jesus, by imitating the way Jesus exercises headship over the congregation. (Ephesians 5:
23) Thus, the husband is not to abdicate his responsibility but to shoulder it manfully; nor is he to be
tyrannical or harsh but, rather, loving, reasonable,
and kind. He keeps in mind that his authority is relative—it never overrules Jehovah’s authority.
13

A wife and mother is to act as her husband’s

helper, or complement. She too is vested with authority in the family, for the Bible speaks of “the in12. What role does Jehovah assign to the husband and father in the
family, and how may a man ful?ll that role?
13. How may a wife and mother ful?ll her family role in a way that
pleases Jehovah?
52

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

struction of your mother.” (Proverbs 1:8) Of course,
her authority is subordinate to that of her husband.
A Christian wife shows respect for her husband’s authority by helping him ful?ll his role as family head.
She does not belittle him, manipulate him, or usurp
his position. Rather, she is supportive and cooperative. When his decisions are not to her liking, she
may respectfully express her thoughts, but she remains submissive. If her husband is not a believer,
she may face challenging situations, yet her submissive conduct may move her husband to seek Jehovah.—Read 1 Peter 3:1.
Children bring delight to Jehovah’s heart when
they obey their father and mother. They also bring
honor and joy to their parents. (Proverbs 10:1) In
single-parent families, children apply the same principle of obedience, aware that their parent may have
an even greater need for their support and cooperation. In families where all members ful?ll the roles
that God designed for them, a great deal of peace
and joy results. This re?ects well on the Originator
of all families, Jehovah God.—Ephesians 3:14, 15.
14

14. How may children bring joy to their parents and to Jehovah?
Why Respect Authority?

53

WHO SE AUTHORITY SHOULD I OBEY?
Principle: “Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver, Jehovah is our King.”—Isaiah 33:22.
Some questions to ask yourself
? What would I do if I were asked to violate
Jehovah’s standards?—Matthew 22:37-39; 26:52;
John 18:36.
? What would I do if I were ordered to refrain from carrying out Jehovah’s commands?
—Acts 5:27-29; Hebrews 10:24, 25.
? What can help me to want to obey those in
positions of authority?—Romans 13:1-4; 1 Corinthians 11:3; Ephesians 6:1-3.
RESPECT IN THE CONGREGATION
15 Jehovah has appointed his Son as Ruler over the
Christian congregation. (Colossians 1:13) Jesus, in
turn, has assigned his “faithful and discreet slave” to
look after the spiritual needs of God’s people on
earth. (Matthew 24:45-47) The Governing Body of
Jehovah’s Witnesses serves as “the faithful and dis15. (a) How may we show in the congregation that we respect Jehovah’s authority? (b) What principles may help us to be obedient to
those taking the lead? (See the box on pages 61-63.)
54

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

creet slave.” As in the ?rst-century Christian congregations, elders today receive instructions and counsel from the Governing Body, either directly or
through its representatives, such as traveling overseers. When we as individuals respect the authority
of Christian elders, we are obeying Jehovah.—Read
1 Thessalonians 5:12; Hebrews 13:17.
16

Elders and ministerial servants are not perfect.

They have failings, as we do. Yet, the elders are “gifts
in men,” provided to help the congregation remain
spiritually strong. (Ephesians 4:8) Elders are appointed by holy spirit. (Acts 20:28) How so? In that
such men must ?rst meet the quali?cations recorded in God’s spirit-inspired Word. (1 Timothy 3:1-7,
12; Titus 1:5-9) Further, the elders who evaluate a
brother’s quali?cations pray earnestly for the guidance of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
17

In the congregation, there may be times when no

elders and ministerial servants are available to perform a task normally assigned to them, such as
16. In what sense are elders appointed by holy spirit?
17. In their congregation activity, why do Christian women at times
wear head coverings?
Why Respect Authority?

55

conducting a meeting for ?eld service. In such instances, other baptized brothers may ?ll in. If none
are available, then quali?ed Christian sisters may ?ll
such needs. However, when a woman ?lls a role normally assigned to a baptized male, she wears a head
covering.1 (1 Corinthians 11:3-10) This requirement
does not demean women. Rather, it provides an opportunity to show respect for Jehovah’s arrangement
of headship, both in the family and in the congregation.
RESPECT FOR SECULAR AUTHORITY
18 True Christians conscientiously adhere to the
principles stated at Romans 13:1-7. (Read.) As you
read over that passage, you can see that “the superior authorities” mentioned there are the secular governments. As long as Jehovah allows these human
powers to exist, they perform important functions,
maintaining a measure of order and providing needed services. We show our respect for these authorities by means of our law-abiding conduct. We are
1 On pages 270-273, the Appendix examines a few practical ways
to apply this principle.

18, 19. (a) How would you explain the principles outlined at Romans
13:1-7? (b) How do we show respect for secular authorities?
56

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

careful to pay whatever taxes we owe, to ?ll out
properly any forms or documents that the government may require, and to comply with any laws that
involve us, our family, business, or possessions. However, we do not submit to the secular authorities if
they ask us to disobey God. Rather, we reply as did
the apostles of old: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”—Acts 5:28, 29; see the box “Whose
Authority Should I Obey?” on page 54.
We also show respect for secular authorities by
our demeanor. At times, we may deal directly with
government o?cials. The apostle Paul dealt with
such rulers as King Herod Agrippa and Governor
Festus. These men were seriously ?awed, but Paul
addressed them with respect. (Acts 26:2, 25) We imitate Paul’s example, whether the o?cial we address is a powerful ruler or a local policeman. In
school, young Christians endeavor to show similar respect for their teachers and for school of?cials and employees. Of course, we do not limit
such respect to those who approve of our beliefs;
we are also respectful when dealing with those
who are antagonistic toward Jehovah’s Witnesses.
19

Why Respect Authority?

57

Really, nonbelievers in general should be able to
sense our respect.—Read Romans 12:17, 18; 1 Peter
3:15.
20 Let us not be stingy when it comes to showing
respect. The apostle Peter wrote: “Honor men of all
sorts.” (1 Peter 2:17) When people sense that we
view them with genuine respect, they may be deeply
impressed. Remember, this quality is becoming ever
rarer. Showing it, then, is one way in which we heed
Jesus’ command: “Let your light shine before men,
so that they may see your ?ne works and give glory
to your Father who is in the heavens.”—Matthew
5:16.
21 In this bedarkened world, good-hearted people
are drawn to spiritual light. So our showing respect
in the family, in the congregation, and in secular settings may attract some and move them to walk in the
light with us. What a glorious prospect! Even if that
does not happen, though, one thing is sure. Our respect for humans pleases Jehovah God and helps us
to remain in his love. What reward could be greater
than that?
20, 21. What are some of the blessings that result from showing proper respect for authority?
58

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

“LISTEN TO COUNSEL AND
ACCEPT DIS CIPLINE”
Satan’s spirit—his rebellious, contentious attitude—?lls today’s world. The Bible thus refers to
Satan as “the ruler of the authority of the air” and
mentions the resulting “spirit that is now at work in
the sons of disobedience.” (Ephesians 2:2) Many today want to be completely independent of the authority of others. Sadly, that spirit of independence
has even infected some in the Christian congregation. For example, an elder may o?er some kindly
counsel on the dangers of immoral or violent entertainment, but some may resist or even resent the
counsel. Each of us needs to apply the words of
Proverbs 19:20: “Listen to counsel and accept discipline, in order to become wise in your future.”
What can help us in this regard? Consider three
common reasons why people resist counsel or discipline, and then note the Scriptural viewpoint.
? “I don’t think the counsel was appropriate.” We may
feel that the counsel does not really ?t our circumstances or that the one giving it did not grasp the
whole picture. Our immediate reaction might even
be to belittle the counsel. (Hebrews 12:5) Since we
are all imperfect, is it not possible that our own
view of the matter is what needs adjusting? (Proverbs
19:3) Was there not some valid reason for the counsel
Why Respect Authority?

59

to be given? Then that is what we need to focus on.
God’s Word advises us: “Hold on to discipline; do not
let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life.”—Proverbs 4:13.
? “I don’t like the way the counsel was given.” Granted,
God’s Word sets a high standard for the way counsel should be given. (Galatians 6:1) However, the Bible also says: “All have sinned and fall short of the
glory of God.” (Romans 3:23) The only way that we
can ever receive perfect counsel delivered in just
the right way is to receive it from a perfect person.
(James 3:2) Jehovah uses imperfect humans to counsel us, so it is wise to avoid focusing on the way the
counsel is given. Look, rather, to the content of the
counsel, and prayerfully consider how to apply it.
? “He is in no position to counsel me!” If we think that
personal faults in the counselor invalidate his counsel, we need to remember the points noted above.
Likewise, if we think that our age, experience, or responsibilities in the congregation somehow put us
above counsel, we need to readjust our thinking. In
ancient Israel, the king had great responsibilities, yet
he had to accept counsel from prophets, priests, and
others who were among his subjects. (2 Samuel 12:
1-13; 2 Chronicles 26:16-20) Today, Jehovah’s organization appoints imperfect men to o?er counsel, and
mature Christians gladly accept it and apply it. If we
60

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

have greater responsibilities or experience than others do, we should be even more conscious of the need
to set an example in reasonableness and humility by
accepting counsel and applying it.—1 Timothy 3:2, 3;
Titus 3:2.
Clearly, none of us is above counsel. So let us be
resolved to accept counsel readily, apply it obediently, and thank Jehovah heartily for this lifesaving
gift. Counsel really is an expression of Jehovah’s
love for us, and we want to remain in God’s love.
—Hebrews 12:6-11.

“BE OBEDIENT TO THO SE WHO ARE
TAKING THE LEAD”
In ancient Israel, there was an urgent need for organization. Moses alone could not oversee millions
of people traveling together in a dangerous wilderness. What did he do? “Moses chose capable men
out of all Israel and appointed them heads over the
people, as chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds,
chiefs of ?fties, and chiefs of tens.”—Exodus 18:25.
In the Christian congregation today, there is a similar need for organization. That is why a ?eld service group has an overseer, a congregation has elders, a group of congregations has a circuit
overseer, and a country has a Country Committee
Why Respect Authority?

61

or a Branch Committee. Because of this organization, each man acting as a shepherd is able to pay
close attention to Jehovah’s sheep assigned to his
care. Such shepherds are accountable to Jehovah
and to Christ.—Acts 20:28.
This organizational arrangement calls for each of
us to be obedient and submissive. Never would we
want to have the attitude of Diotrephes, who had no
respect for those taking the lead in his day. (3 John
9, 10) Rather, we want to heed the words of the
apostle Paul, who wrote: “Be obedient to those who
are taking the lead among you and be submissive,
for they are keeping watch over you as those who
will render an account, so that they may do this
with joy and not with sighing, for this would be
damaging to you.” (Hebrews 13:17) Some obey when
they agree with the direction coming from those
taking the lead but refuse to submit when they disagree with the direction or cannot see the reason for
it. Keep in mind, though, that being submissive can
include the idea that we obey even when we are not
inclined to do so. Each of us, then, does well to ask
himself, ‘Am I obedient and submissive to those taking the lead over me?’
Of course, God’s Word does not spell out every
arrangement or procedure needed to help the congregation function. Yet, the Bible does say: “Let all
62

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

things take place decently and by arrangement.”
(1 Corinthians 14:40) The Governing Body obeys
this direction by putting in place various helpful
procedures and guidelines that ensure the smooth
and orderly operation of the congregation. Responsible Christian men do their part by setting an example of obedience as they put such arrangements
into e?ect. They also show themselves “reasonable,
ready to obey” those placed in oversight. (James 3:
17) Thus, each group, congregation, circuit, and
country is blessed with a united, orderly body of believers who re?ect well on the happy God.—1 Corinthians 14:33; 1 Timothy 1:11.
On the other hand, Paul’s words found at
Hebrews 13:17 also highlight why a disobedient spirit is harmful. It may cause those in positions of responsibility to do their work “with sighing.” What
should be considered a privilege of sacred service
can feel like a burden when a brother must deal
with an uncooperative, rebellious spirit in the ?ock.
In turn, damage results “to you,” the entire congregation. Of course, there is yet another form of
damage that results when a person refuses to submit to theocratic order. It hurts his spirituality if he
is too proud to submit, putting distance between
him and his heavenly Father. (Psalm 138:6) Let us
all, then, be determined to remain obedient and submissive.
Why Respect Authority?

63

CHAPTER 5

How to Keep Separate
From the World
“You are no part of the world.”
—JOHN 15:19.

DURING his ?nal night on earth as a human, Jesus expressed deep concern for the future welfare of his followers. He even prayed about the matter, saying to his
Father: “I do not request that you take them out of the
world, but that you watch over them because of the
wicked one. They are no part of the world, just as I am
no part of the world.” (John 17:15, 16) In this heartfelt
request, Jesus showed both his deep love for his followers and the importance of his words stated earlier that
night to some of them: “You are no part of the world.”
(John 15:19) Clearly, it was of great importance to Jesus that his followers keep separate from the world!
2

“The world” Jesus mentioned refers to all of man-

kind who are alienated from God, ruled by Satan, and
1. What did Jesus emphasize during his ?nal night on earth as a human?
2. What is “the world” to which Jesus referred?
64

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

enslaved to the sel?sh, prideful spirit that emanates
from him. (John 14:30; Ephesians 2:2; 1 John 5:19)
Indeed, “friendship with [that] world is enmity with
God.” (James 4:4) How, though, can all who want to remain in God’s love be in the world yet be separate from
it? We will consider ?ve ways: by remaining loyal to
God’s Kingdom under Christ and neutral in worldly
politics, by resisting the spirit of the world, by being
modest in our dress and grooming, by keeping our life
simple, and by putting on our spiritual suit of armor.
3

REMAINING LOYAL AND NEUTRAL
Instead of participating in the politics of his day,

Jesus focused on preaching about God’s Kingdom, the
future heavenly government of which he was the prospective King. (Daniel 7:13, 14; Luke 4:43; 17:20, 21)
Thus, when before Roman Governor Pontius Pilate, Jesus could say: “My Kingdom is no part of this world.”
(John 18:36) His faithful followers imitate his example
by giving their loyalty to Christ and his Kingdom and
by announcing that Kingdom to the world. (Matthew
3. (a) How did Jesus view the politics of his day? (b) Why can it be
said that Jesus’ anointed followers serve as ambassadors? (Include
footnote.)
How to Keep Separate From the World

65

EARLY CHRISTIAN NEUTRALS
Secular history provides ample evidence that
the early Christians remained politically neutral and refrained from warfare. Says the book
The Beginnings of Christianity: “The founders of
Christianity guarded with sedulous care against
the development of anything like a disposition to
interfere directly with the established political
order.” Similarly, the book On the Road to Civilization notes: “Early Christianity was little understood and was regarded with little favor by those
who ruled the pagan world. . . . Christians refused
to share certain duties of Roman citizens. . . . They
would not hold political o?ce.”
Regarding the early Christians and military service, German theologian Peter Meinhold said:
“Being a Christian and a soldier was considered irreconcilable.” In his essay “An Inquiry Into the
Accordancy of War With the Principles of Christianity,” religion writer Jonathan Dymond wrote
that for some time after the death of Jesus, His
followers “refused to engage in [war]; whatever
were the consequences, whether reproach, or imprisonment, or death.” Dymond added: “These
facts are indisputable.” Only when “Christianity became corrupted,” said another writer, did
Christians become soldiers.
66

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

24:14) “We are ambassadors substituting for Christ,”
wrote the apostle Paul. “As substitutes for Christ, we
beg: ‘Become reconciled to God.’ ”1—2 Corinthians
5:20.
Because ambassadors represent a foreign sovereign
or state, they do not interfere in the internal a?airs of
the countries where they serve; they remain neutral.
Ambassadors do, however, advocate the government
of the country they represent. The same is true of
Christ’s anointed followers, whose “citizenship exists
in the heavens.” (Philippians 3:20) In fact, thanks to
their zealous Kingdom preaching, they have helped
millions of Christ’s “other sheep” to “become reconciled to God.” (John 10:16; Matthew 25:31-40) These
latter ones serve as Christ’s envoys, as it were, in support of Jesus’ anointed brothers. As one united ?ock
advocating the Messianic Kingdom, both groups maintain strict neutrality toward the world’s political affairs.—Read Isaiah 2:2-4.
4

1 Since Pentecost 33 C.E., Christ has served as King over his congregation of anointed followers on earth. (Colossians 1:13) In 1914,
Christ received royal authority over “the kingdom of the world.”
Hence, anointed Christians now also serve as ambassadors of the
Messianic Kingdom.—Revelation 11:15.

4. How have all true Christians demonstrated loyalty to God’s Kingdom? (See the box on page 66.)
How to Keep Separate From the World

67

Loyalty to Christ is not the only reason that true
Christians are neutral. Unlike ancient Israel, which had
a God-given land allocation, we are part of an international brotherhood. (Matthew 28:19; 1 Peter 2:9) Thus,
if we were to rally to the side of local political parties,
both our freeness of speech in regard to the Kingdom
message and our Christian unity would be severely
compromised. (1 Corinthians 1:10) Furthermore, during war time, we would be ?ghting against fellow believers, whom we are commanded to love. (John 13:34,
35; 1 John 3:10-12) With good reason, then, Jesus told
his disciples to lay down the sword. And he even told
them to love their enemies.—Matthew 5:44; 26:52; see
the box “Am I Remaining Neutral?” on page 70.
5

As true Christians, we have dedicated our life to
God, not to any human, human institution, or nation.
Says 1 Corinthians 6:19, 20: “You do not belong to yourselves, for you were bought with a price.” Thus, while
rendering “Caesar” his due in the form of honor, taxes,
and relative subjection, Jesus’ followers give “God’s
6

5. How is the Christian congregation di?erent from ancient Israel, and
how does this di?erence manifest itself?
6. How does your dedication to God a?ect your relationship with Caesar?
68

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

things to God.” (Mark 12:17; Romans 13:1-7) This includes their worship, their whole-souled love, and their
loyal obedience. If necessary, they are ready to give up
their life for God.—Luke 4:8; 10:27; read Acts 5:29; Romans 14:8.
RESISTING “THE SPIRIT OF THE WORLD”
7 Another way that Christians keep separate from the
world is by resisting its evil spirit. “We received, not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit that is from God,”
wrote Paul. (1 Corinthians 2:12) To the Ephesians, he
said: “You at one time walked according to . . . this
world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air,
the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.”—Ephesians 2:2, 3.

The world’s “air,” or spirit, is an invisible, impelling
force that incites disobedience to God and fosters “the
desire of the ?esh and the desire of the eyes.” (1 John 2:
16; 1 Timothy 6:9, 10) “The authority” of this spirit lies
in its appeal to the sinful ?esh, its subtlety, its relentlessness and, like air, its pervasiveness. Moreover,
it is “at work” in disobedient humans by gradually
nurturing in them ungodly traits, such as sel?shness,
8

7, 8. What is “the spirit of the world,” and how is that spirit “at
work” in disobedient humans?
How to Keep Separate From the World

69

haughtiness, greedy ambition, and the spirit of moral
independence and rebellion.1 Simply put, the spirit of
the world progressively causes the traits of the Devil to
grow in the hearts of humans.—John 8:44; Acts 13:10;
1 John 3:8, 10.
9

Can the spirit of the world take root in your mind

1 See Reasoning From the Scriptures, pages 389-393, published by
Jehovah’s Witnesses.

9. In what ways can the world’s spirit enter our mind and heart?

AM I REMAINING NEUTRAL?
Principle: “My Kingdom is no part of
this world.”—John 18:36.
Some questions to ask yourself
? How would I explain why saluting the ?ag is
a form of idol worship?1—Exodus 20:4, 5; 1 John
5:21.
? When explaining my nonparticipation in certain national ceremonies, how would I show my
deep respect for those who do not share my
beliefs?—1 Peter 3:15.
? What are my reasons for not supporting any political parties or performing any type of military
service?—John 13:34; 1 John 3:10-12.
1 See the Appendix, pages 273-277.
70

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

and heart? Yes, but only if you let it do so by lowering your guard. (Read Proverbs 4:23.) Its in?uence
often begins subtly, perhaps by way of associates who
may appear to be good people but, in fact, have no
love for Jehovah. (Proverbs 13:20; 1 Corinthians 15:33)
You can also absorb that evil spirit through objectionable literature, pornographic or apostate Internet sites,
unwholesome entertainment, and highly competitive
sports—really, through anyone or anything that conveys the thinking of Satan or his system.
How can we resist the insidious spirit of the world
and keep ourselves in God’s love? Only by taking full
advantage of Jehovah’s spiritual provisions and by
praying constantly for holy spirit. Jehovah is far greater than the Devil or the wicked world under satanic
control. (1 John 4:4) How important, then, that we stay
close to Jehovah in prayer!
10

BEING MODEST IN OUR DRES S
AND GRO OMING
11 An outward indication of the spirit that impels a
person is his dress, grooming, and hygiene. In many
lands, standards of dress have fallen so low that one
10. How can we resist the spirit of the world?
11. How has the world’s spirit in?uenced standards of dress?
How to Keep Separate From the World

71

television commentator suggested that soon there will
be nothing left for prostitutes to wear. Even girls not
yet in their teens have been caught up in this trend
—“long on skin, short on modesty,” said one newspaper report. Another trend is to dress in a slovenly
manner that re?ects a spirit of rebellion as well as a
lack of dignity and self-respect.
As servants of Jehovah, we rightly want to look our
best, which means dressing in a way that is neat, clean,
in good taste, and appropriate for the occasion. At all
times, our appearance ought to re?ect “modesty and
soundness of mind,” which along with “good works” is
?tting for anyone—male or female—“professing devotion to God.” Of course, our main concern is, not to
draw attention to ourselves, but to “keep [ourselves] in
God’s love.” (1 Timothy 2:9, 10; Jude 21) Yes, we want
our most beautiful adornment to be “the secret person
of the heart . . . , which is of great value in the eyes of
God.”—1 Peter 3:3, 4.
12

Keep in mind, too, that our clothing styles and
grooming can in?uence how others view true worship.
The Greek word rendered “modesty,” when used in a
moral sense, expresses the thought of reverence, awe,
13

12, 13. What principles should govern our dress and grooming?
72

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

and respect for the feelings or opinion of others. Our
goal, therefore, should be to subordinate our presumed
rights to the consciences of others. Above all, we want
to bring honor to Jehovah and his people and to recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, doing “all things for
God’s glory.”—1 Corinthians 4:9; 10:31; 2 Corinthians
6:3, 4; 7:1.
Our dress, grooming, and cleanliness are even
more important when we are engaging in the ?eld ministry or attending a Christian meeting. Ask yourself:
‘Do my appearance and personal hygiene draw undue
attention to me? Do they embarrass others? Do I consider my rights in these areas to be more important
than qualifying for service privileges in the congregation?’—Psalm 68:6; Philippians 4:5; 1 Peter 5:6.
14

The Bible does not set out for Christians a list of
rules on dress, grooming, and hygiene. Jehovah has no
desire to deny us our freedom of choice or the use of
our thinking faculties. Rather, he wants us to become
mature people who reason on Bible principles and who
15

14. In regard to our appearance and hygiene, what questions should
we ask ourselves?
15. Why does God’s Word not set out a list of rules on dress, grooming, and hygiene?
How to Keep Separate From the World

73

“through use have their powers of discernment trained
to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Hebrews 5:14)
Above all, he wants us to be governed by love—love for
God and neighbor. (Read Mark 12:30, 31.) Within those
boundaries, there is the potential for great variety in
dress and grooming. Evidence of this can be seen in the
colorfully dressed, joyful throngs of Jehovah’s people
no matter where on earth they are gathered.
16

KEEPING OUR LIFE SIMPLE
The spirit of the world is deceptive and impels mil-

lions to look to money and material things for happiness. However, Jesus said: “Even when a person has an
abundance, his life does not result from the things he
possesses.” (Luke 12:15) While not endorsing asceticism, or extreme self-denial, Jesus taught that life and
genuine happiness come to those who are “conscious of
their spiritual need” and those who maintain a simple
life, one that is focused on spiritual things. (Matthew
5:3; 6:22, footnote) Ask yourself: ‘Do I truly believe
what Jesus taught, or am I being in?uenced by “the father of the lie”? (John 8:44) What do my words, my
16. How does the spirit of the world run contrary to Jesus’ teaching,
and what questions should we ask ourselves?
74

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

goals, my priorities, and my way of life reveal?’—Luke
6:45; 21:34-36; 2 John 6.
“Wisdom is proved righteous by its works,” said Jesus. (Matthew 11:19) Consider just some of the bene?ts
enjoyed by those who maintain a simple life. They ?nd
true refreshment in Kingdom service. (Matthew 11:29,
30) They avoid undue anxieties and thus spare themselves much mental and emotional pain. (Read 1 Timothy 6:9, 10.) Content with having life’s necessities, they
have more time for their family and Christian companions. They may sleep better as a result. (Ecclesiastes 5:
12) They experience the greater joy of giving, doing
so in whatever way they can. (Acts 20:35) And they
“abound in hope” and have inner peace and contentment. (Romans 15:13; Matthew 6:31, 32) These blessings are truly priceless!
17

TAKING UP “THE COMPLETE SUIT OF ARMOR”
18 Those who keep themselves in God’s love also enjoy
spiritual protection from Satan, who wants to deprive
Christians, not just of happiness, but of everlasting life.
(1 Peter 5:8) “We have a struggle,” said Paul, “not against
17. Name some bene?ts enjoyed by those who maintain a simple life.
18. How does the Bible describe our enemy, his methods, and the nature of our “struggle”?
How to Keep Separate From the World

75

blood and ?esh, but against the governments, against
the authorities, against the world rulers of this darkness,
against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.”
(Ephesians 6:12) The word “struggle” suggests that our
?ght is not long-distance—from the safety of a hidden
bunker, so to speak—but hand-to-hand. Furthermore,
the terms “governments,” “authorities,” and “world rulers” indicate that attacks from the spirit realm are highly organized and deliberate.
Despite human frailties and limitations, however,
we can gain the victory. How? By taking up “the complete suit of armor from God.” (Ephesians 6:13) Describing that armor, Ephesians 6:14-18 reads: “Stand
?rm, therefore, with the belt of truth fastened around
your waist, wearing the breastplate of righteousness,
and having your feet shod in readiness to declare the
good news of peace. Besides all of this, take up the
large shield of faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the wicked one’s burning arrows. Also, accept the helmet [or, hope] of salvation, and the sword
of the spirit, that is, God’s word, while with every form
of prayer and supplication you carry on prayer on every
occasion in spirit.”
19

19. Describe the Christian’s spiritual suit of armor.
76

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

20

Since it is a provision of God, that spiritual suit of

armor will not fail us, provided that we wear it at all
times. Unlike literal soldiers, who may have long breaks
from ?ghting, Christians are in a relentless life-anddeath struggle that will not stop until God has destroyed Satan’s world and abyssed all wicked spirits.
(Revelation 12:17; 20:1-3) So do not give up if you are
struggling with weaknesses or wrong desires, for we all
have to “pummel” ourselves in order to stay faithful to
Jehovah. (1 Corinthians 9:27) Indeed, it is when we are
not struggling that we should be concerned!
21

Moreover, we cannot win this ?ght in our own

strength. Hence, Paul reminds us of the need to pray to
Jehovah “on every occasion in spirit.” At the same time,
we should listen to Jehovah by studying his Word and
associating with fellow “soldiers” at every opportunity,
for we are not in this ?ght alone! (Philemon 2; Hebrews
10:24, 25) Those who are faithful in all these areas will
not only come o? victorious but will also be able to
make a strong defense for their faith when it is challenged.
20. How does our situation di?er from that of a literal soldier?
21. How only can we come o? victorious in our spiritual warfare?
How to Keep Separate From the World

77

BE READY TO DEFEND YOUR FAITH
22 “Because you are no part of the world,” said Jesus,
“the world hates you.” (John 15:19) Christians, therefore, must always be ready to defend their faith and to
do so in a respectful, mild manner. (Read 1 Peter 3:15.)
Ask yourself: ‘Do I understand why Jehovah’s Witnesses sometimes take a stand that is contrary to popular
opinion? When facing the challenge of taking such a
stand, am I thoroughly convinced that what the Bible
and the faithful slave say is right? (Matthew 24:45; John
17:17) And when it comes to doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes, am I not only prepared to be di?erent but also
proud to be di?erent?’—Psalm 34:2; Matthew 10:32, 33.

Often, though, our desire to keep separate from the
world is put to the test in more subtle ways. For example, as mentioned earlier, the Devil tries to lure Jehovah’s servants into the world by means of worldly
entertainment. How can we choose wholesome entertainment that will leave us refreshed and with a clean
conscience? That subject will be considered in the next
chapter.
23

22, 23. (a) Why must we be ready at all times to defend our faith,
and what questions should we ask ourselves? (b) What subject will be
considered in the next chapter?
78

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 6

How to Choose
Wholesome Entertainment
“Do all things for God’s glory.”
—1 CORINTHIANS 10:31.

IMAGINE that you are about to eat a tasty piece of
fruit but then notice that a part of it is rotten. What
will you do? Well, you could eat the entire fruit, even
the bad part; you could throw away the entire fruit,
including the bad part; or you could cut the bad part
out of the fruit and enjoy the good part. What choice
will you make?
2

In a way, entertainment is like that fruit. At times,

you want to enjoy some recreation, but you realize that much of the entertainment available today
is morally bad, even rotten. So, what will you do?
Some might tolerate what is bad and swallow whatever entertainment this world has to o?er. Others
might avoid all entertainment to make sure that they
will not be exposed to anything harmful. Still others
1, 2. What choice do we need to make regarding entertainment?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

79

might carefully avoid entertainment that is harmful
but occasionally enjoy that which is relatively wholesome. What choice should you make in order to keep
yourself in God’s love?
3

Most of us would select the third option. We ap-

preciate the need for some recreation but want to limit our entertainment to what is morally sound. Therefore, we need to consider how we can determine what
is wholesome and what is not. First, though, let us discuss what e?ect our choice of entertainment can have
on the worship we render to Jehovah.
“D O ALL THINGS FOR G OD’S GLORY”
4 Some time ago, an elderly Witness who was baptized in 1946 observed: “I have made it a point to be
present at every baptism talk and to listen carefully,
as if it were my own baptism.” Why? He explained,
“Keeping my dedication fresh has been an important
step in remaining faithful.” You will doubtless agree
with that sentiment. Reminding yourself that you
promised Jehovah you would use your entire life to
serve him motivates you to endure. (Read Ecclesiastes
3. What will we now consider?
4. How should our dedication a?ect our choice of entertainment?
80

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

5:4.) In fact, meditating on your dedication will a?ect
your view not only of the Christian ministry but also
of all other areas of life—including entertainment.
The apostle Paul underlined that truth when he wrote
to Christians in his day: “Whether you are eating or
drinking or doing anything else, do all things for
God’s glory.”—1 Corinthians 10:31.
5

Everything you do in life is related to your wor-

ship of Jehovah. In his letter to the Romans, Paul
used a forceful expression to impress this truth on fellow believers. He urged them: “Present your bodies as
a living sacri?ce, holy and acceptable to God, a sacred
service with your power of reason.” (Romans 12:1)
Your body includes your mind, your heart, and your
physical strength. All of these, you use in serving
God. (Mark 12:30) Paul speaks of such whole-souled
service as a sacri?ce. That expression contains an implicit warning. Under the Mosaic Law, a sacri?ce that
was blemished was rejected by God. (Leviticus 22:1820) Similarly, if a Christian’s spiritual sacri?ce is
5. How does Leviticus 22:18-20 help us to see the implicit warning
behind Romans 12:1?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

81

tainted in some way, it will be rejected by God. How,
though, could that happen?
6

Paul admonished the Christians in Rome: “Do not

. . . go on presenting your bodies [“members,” footnote] to sin.” Paul also told them to “put the practices
of the body to death.” (Romans 6:12-14; 8:13) Earlier
in his letter, he had given some examples of such
“practices of the body.” Regarding sinful mankind, we
read: “Their mouth is full of cursing.” “Their feet are
swift to shed blood.” “There is no fear of God before
their eyes.” (Romans 3:13-18) A Christian would blemish his body if he used his “members,” or body parts,
for such sinful practices. For instance, if a Christian
today deliberately views such depraved material as
pornography or watches sadistic violence, he is “presenting [his eyes] to sin” and is thus tainting his whole
body. Any worship that he renders amounts to a sacri?ce that is no longer holy and is unacceptable to
God. (Deuteronomy 15:21; 1 Peter 1:14-16; 2 Peter 3:
11) What a high price to pay for pursuing unwholesome entertainment!
6, 7. How could a Christian taint his body, and what could be the consequences?
82

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Clearly, a Christian’s choice of entertainment has
weighty consequences. Surely, then, we want to
7

choose entertainment that will enhance, not taint, our
sacri?ce to God. Let us now discuss how we can determine what is wholesome and what is not.
8

“ABHOR WHAT IS WICKED”
In broad terms, entertainment can be divided into

two categories. One includes entertainment that
Christians de?nitely avoid; the other is made up of entertainment that Christians may or may not ?nd acceptable. Let us start by considering the ?rst category
—entertainment that Christians avoid.
9

As noted in Chapter 1, some forms of entertain-

ment highlight activities expressly condemned in the
Bible. Think, for example, of Web sites as well as movies, TV programs, and music that have sadistic or demonistic content or that contain pornography or promote vile, immoral practices. Since such degraded
forms of entertainment portray in a positive light activities that violate Bible principles or break Bible
laws, they should be shunned by true Christians. (Acts
8, 9. (a) Entertainment can be broadly divided into what two categories? (b) What forms of entertainment do we reject, and why?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

83

15:28, 29; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; Revelation 21:8) By rejecting such unwholesome entertainment, you prove
to Jehovah that you truly “abhor what is wicked” and
consistently “turn away from what is bad.” That way,
you have “faith without hypocrisy.”—Romans 12:9;
Psalm 34:14; 1 Timothy 1:5.
10

Some may feel, though, that indulging in enter-

tainment that graphically portrays immoral behavior
is harmless. They reason, ‘I may watch it in movies or
on TV, but I would never do such things myself.’ Such
reasoning is deceptive and dangerous. (Read Jeremiah
17:9.) If we ?nd it entertaining to watch what Jehovah
condemns, do we really “abhor what is wicked”? Repeatedly exposing ourselves to wicked conduct will
dull our senses. (Psalm 119:70; 1 Timothy 4:1, 2) Such
a practice could a?ect what we do or how we view the
sinful conduct of others.
11

This has actually happened. Some Christians have

committed immoral acts because they were in?uenced
by the entertainment that they habitually watched.
10. What sort of reasoning about entertainment is dangerous, and
why?
11. How has Galatians 6:7 proved true in regard to entertainment?
84

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

They learned the hard way that “whatever a person is
sowing, this he will also reap.” (Galatians 6:7) But such
a sad outcome can be avoided. If you carefully sow in
your mind what is sound, you will happily reap in your
life what is wholesome.—See the box “What Entertainment Should I Choose?”

WHAT ENTERTAINMENT
SHOULD I CHO O SE?
Principle: “Abhor what is wicked; cling to
what is good.”—Romans 12:9.
Would God be pleased if . . .
? the lyrics of the music I listen to make it
di?cult for me to keep my mind on chaste
things?—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.
? I imitate the negative speech and actions of
people in the movies I choose to watch?—Luke
6:40.
? I choose to play video games that require me to
act the part of a violent or an immoral person?
—Psalm 11:5, 7.
? the standards that I preach to others are not
the standards that I use to guide me in my choice
of entertainment?—Romans 2:21.
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

85

12

PERS ONAL DECISIONS BASED ON
BIBLE PRINCIPLES
Let us now discuss the second category—enter-

tainment that features activities that are neither directly condemned nor expressly approved in God’s
Word. When choosing from such entertainment, each
Christian needs to make a personal decision as to
what he ?nds wholesome. (Read Galatians 6:5.) However, when faced with this choice, we are not without
guidance. The Bible contains principles, or fundamental truths, that enable us to perceive Jehovah’s
way of thinking. By paying attention to such principles, we will be able to perceive “what the will of
Jehovah is” in all things, including our choice of
entertainment.—Ephesians 5:17.
13

Understandably, not all Christians have devel-

oped their moral perception, or discernment, to the
same degree. (Philippians 1:9) Moreover, Christians
realize that in the area of entertainment, tastes vary.
Therefore, it is not to be expected that all Christians
12. How does Galatians 6:5 relate to entertainment, and what guidance do we have for making personal decisions?
13. What will move us to avoid entertainment that could displease Jehovah?
86

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

will make exactly the same decisions. Even so, the
more we allow godly principles to in?uence our mind
and heart, the more eager we will be to avoid any
form of entertainment that could displease Jehovah.
—Psalm 119:11, 129; 1 Peter 2:16.
14

When choosing entertainment, there is anoth-

er important factor to consider: your time. While
the content of your entertainment reveals what you
?nd acceptable, the amount of time you spend on
it reveals what you ?nd important. For Christians,
of course, spiritual matters are the most important.
(Read Matthew 6:33.) What, then, can you do to make
sure that Kingdom interests remain ?rst in your life?
The apostle Paul stated: “Keep strict watch that how
you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, making the best use of your time.” (Ephesians 5:15, 16) Indeed, setting clear limits on the amount of time you
set aside for entertainment will help you to have
the needed time available for “the more important
things”—activities that contribute to your spiritual
well-being.—Philippians 1:10.
14. (a) What factor should we consider when choosing entertainment?
(b) How can we keep Kingdom interests ?rst in life?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

87

It is also wise to allow a margin of safety when
choosing entertainment. What does that mean? Consider once more the example of the fruit. To avoid inadvertently eating what is rotten, you cut out not just
the exact area that is bad but also a margin around
it. Similarly, it is wise to apply a safety margin in
choosing entertainment. A wise Christian avoids not
only entertainment that is clearly in violation of Bible principles but also types that are dubious or
that seem to include elements that are spiritually unhealthy. (Proverbs 4:25-27) Sticking close to God’s
Word will help you to do just that.
15

“WHATEVER THINGS ARE CHASTE”
16 When choosing entertainment, true Christians
?rst of all take into account Jehovah’s view. The Bible reveals Jehovah’s feelings and standards. For instance, King Solomon lists several things that Jehovah hates, such as “a lying tongue, and hands that
shed innocent blood, a heart plotting wicked schemes,
and feet that run quickly to evil.” (Proverbs 6:16-19)
15. Why is it wise to allow a margin of safety when choosing entertainment?
16. (a) How may we show that we have Jehovah’s view on morals?
(b) How can applying Bible principles become your way of life?
88

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

How should Jehovah’s view a?ect yours? “O you who
love Jehovah,” exhorts the psalmist, “hate what is
bad.” (Psalm 97:10) Your choices in entertainment
need to show that you truly do hate what Jehovah
hates. (Galatians 5:19-21) Keep in mind, too, that
what you do in private, more so than in public, reveals
what kind of person you really are. (Psalm 11:4; 16:8)
Hence, if you have a heartfelt desire to re?ect in all
aspects of your life Jehovah’s feelings on moral matters, you will always make choices in accord with Bible principles. Doing so will become your way of life.
—2 Corinthians 3:18.
What more can you do to ensure that you will act
in harmony with Jehovah’s way of thinking when
choosing entertainment? Re?ect on the question,
‘How will this a?ect me and my standing with God?’
17

17. B efore choosing entertainment, what questions should we ask?

Before choosing a form of entertainment, Christians
ask themselves
? How will it a?ect my relationship with God?
? How will it a?ect me personally?
? How will it a?ect others?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

89

For instance, before deciding whether to watch a certain movie, ask yourself, ‘How will the content of this
movie a?ect my conscience?’ Let us consider what
principles have a bearing on that subject.
A key principle is found at Philippians 4:8, which
states: “Whatever things are true, whatever things are
of serious concern, whatever things are righteous,
whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever
things are virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue considering these things.” Granted,
Paul was discussing, not entertainment, but the meditations of the heart, which should center on things
that please God. (Psalm 19:14) Yet, Paul’s words can
be applied in principle to the matter of entertainment.
How?
18

Ask yourself, ‘Does my choice of movies, video
games, music, or other forms of entertainment ?ll
my mind with “whatever things are chaste”?’ For instance, after you watch a movie, what mental images
are left dominating your mind? If they are pleasant,
19

18, 19. (a) How can the principle found at Philippians 4:8 help us to
determine whether our entertainment is wholesome? (b) What other
principles can help you to select good entertainment? (See footnote.)
90

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

pure, and refreshing, then you know that your entertainment was wholesome. However, if the movie you
watched makes you think about things that are unchaste, then your entertainment was unsound, even
harmful. (Matthew 12:33; Mark 7:20-23) Why? Because thinking about things that are morally unclean
disturbs your inner peace, scars your Bible-trained
conscience, and can ruin your relationship with God.
(Ephesians 5:5; 1 Timothy 1:5, 19) Since such entertainment has a harmful e?ect on you personally, be
determined to avoid it.1 (Romans 12:2) Be like the
psalmist who prayed to Jehovah: “Turn my eyes away
from looking at what is worthless.”—Psalm 119:37.
20

SEEK THE ADVANTAGE OF OTHERS
Paul mentioned a key Bible principle that needs

to be taken into account when making decisions on
personal matters. He stated: “All things are lawful,
but not all things build up. Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other
1 Some more principles applicable to entertainment are found at
Proverbs 3:31; 13:20; Ephesians 5:3, 4; and Colossians 3:5, 8, 20.

20, 21. How does 1 Corinthians 10:23, 24 relate to choosing wholesome entertainment?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

91

person.” (1 Corinthians 10:23, 24) How does that principle relate to choosing wholesome entertainment?
You need to ask yourself, ‘How will the entertainment
that I choose a?ect others?’
21 Your conscience may allow you to enjoy a certain
form of entertainment that you view as “lawful,” or
acceptable. However, if you notice that other believers with a more restrictive conscience ?nd it objectionable, you may decide not to pursue it. Why? Because you do not want to “sin against your brothers”
—or even be “sinning against Christ,” as Paul stated—by making it more di?cult for your fellow believers to maintain faithfulness to God. You take to heart
the admonition: “Keep from becoming causes for
stumbling.” (1 Corinthians 8:12; 10:32) True Christians today heed Paul’s considerate and perceptive
counsel by avoiding entertainment that may be “lawful” but does not “build up.”—Romans 14:1; 15:1.
22 There is, though, another side to the matter of
seeking the advantage of others. A Christian with a
more restrictive conscience should not insist that all
in the Christian congregation conform to his narrow22. Why do Christians allow room for di?erent views in personal matters?
92

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

er view on what is proper entertainment. If he were to
do so, he would be like a driver on a highway who insists that all other drivers using the same road hold to
the same speed that he prefers. Such a demand would
not be reasonable. Out of Christian love, someone
with a more con?ning conscience needs to respect
fellow believers whose views on entertainment differ somewhat from his own but are still within the
bounds of Christian principles. That way, he lets his
“reasonableness become known to all men.”—Philippians 4:5; Ecclesiastes 7:16.
23 In short, how can you make sure that you choose
wholesome entertainment? Reject any kind of entertainment that graphically portrays degraded, immoral activities that are expressly condemned in God’s
Word. Follow Bible principles that can be applied to
types of entertainment that are not speci?cally mentioned in the Bible. Avoid entertainment that injures
your conscience, and be willing to forgo forms of entertainment that might wound the sensitivities of others, especially those of fellow believers. May your
?rm decision to do so bring glory to God and keep
you and your family in his love.
23. How can you make sure that you choose wholesome entertainment?
How to Choose Wholesome Entertainment

93

CHAPTER 7

Do You Value Life
as God Does?
“With you is the source of life.”
—PSALM 36:9.

OUR heavenly Father has given us a priceless possession—the gift of life as intelligent humans who
are capable of re?ecting his qualities. (Genesis 1:27)
Thanks to that precious gift, we are able to reason
on Bible principles. By applying them, we can grow
into spiritually mature people who love Jehovah and
whose “powers of discernment [have been] trained to
distinguish both right and wrong.”—Hebrews 5:14.
2

The ability to reason on Bible principles is espe-

cially important today, for the world has become so
complex that no amount of laws could cover every
possible situation that might arise in life. Medical
science well illustrates this point, especially in regard
to products and procedures involving blood. This is
an area of interest and concern to all who want to
1, 2. What gift from God is especially valuable today, and why so?
94

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

obey Jehovah. Still, if we understand the relevant Bible principles, we should be able to make wise decisions that both satisfy our conscience and keep us in
God’s love. (Proverbs 2:6-11) Consider some of these
principles.
3

LIFE AND BLO OD ARE SACRED
Jehovah ?rst disclosed the intimate connection be-

tween life and blood, as well as their sanctity, or sacredness, shortly after Cain murdered Abel. “Listen!”
God said to Cain. “Your brother’s blood is crying out
to me from the ground.” (Genesis 4:10) In Jehovah’s
eyes, Abel’s blood represented his life, which had
been brutally cut short. So, in a sense, Abel’s blood
cried out to God for vengeance.—Hebrews 12:24.
4

After the Noachian Flood, God gave humans per-

mission to eat the ?esh of animals but not the blood.
God stated: “Only ?esh with its life—its blood—you
must not eat. Besides that, I will demand an accounting for your lifeblood.” (Genesis 9:4, 5) This command applies to all of Noah’s descendants right down
to our day. It rea?rms what was implied in God’s
3, 4. When was the sanctity of blood introduced in the Scriptures, and
on what principles does it rest?
Do You Value Life as God Does?

95

earlier words to Cain—that the life, or soul, of all
creatures is represented by the blood. That decree
also establishes that Jehovah, the Source of life, will
hold to account all humans who disrespect life and
blood.—Psalm 36:9.
5

These two fundamental truths were re?ected in

the Mosaic Law. Leviticus 17:10, 11 reads: “If any man
. . . eats any sort of blood, I will certainly set my face
against the one who is eating the blood, and I will cut
him o? from among his people. For the life of the
?esh is in the blood, and I myself have given it on the
altar for you to make atonement for yourselves, because it is the blood that makes atonement by means
of the life in it.”1—See the box “The Atoning Power
of Blood,” on page 97.
6

If the blood of a slaughtered animal was not used

on the altar, it was to be poured out on the ground.
Thus, in a symbolic way, the life was returned to its
1 Concerning God’s statement, “the life of the ?esh is in the
blood,” the journal Scienti?c American notes: “Metaphorical significance aside, the statement is literally true: each type of blood cell
is required for life.”

5, 6. How did the Mosaic Law show that blood is both sacred and
precious? (See also the box on page 100.)
96

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

THE ATONING P OWER OF BLO OD
In God’s Word, blood is considered to be
equivalent to life. Hence, instead of being condemned because he broke Jehovah’s commandments, a repentant sinner in ancient Israel could
o?er an animal sacri?ce on God’s altar. (Leviticus 4:27-31) This sacri?ce atoned for his sins
but only in a provisional way.
As used in the Bible, “atonement” conveys the
thought of “exchange” or “cover,” as the right
lid, for example, would properly cover a container. Of course, no animal could perfectly
“cover,” or atone for, the sins of a human. Animal sacri?ces did, however, provide a shadow of
the perfect atonement sacri?ce to come.—Hebrews 10:1, 4.
That atonement was provided “through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all
time.” (Hebrews 10:10) Christ’s perfect human
life, represented by his “precious blood, like
that of an unblemished and spotless lamb,” corresponded exactly to the life that Adam lost.
(1 Peter 1:19) Thus, in an exquisitely beautiful
and loving way, justice was satis?ed and our
“everlasting deliverance” was made possible.
—Hebrews 9:11, 12; John 3:16; Revelation 7:14.
Do You Value Life as God Does?

97

original Owner. (Deuteronomy 12:16; Ezekiel 18:4)
Note, though, that the Israelites did not have to go to
extremes in trying to remove every trace of blood
from the animal’s tissues. Provided that the creature
was properly slaughtered and bled, an Israelite could
eat it with a clear conscience, as due respect would
have been accorded to the Life-Giver.
7

David, “a man agreeable to [God’s] heart,” grasped

the principles behind God’s law on blood. (Acts 13:
22) On one occasion when he was very thirsty, three
of his men forced their way into the enemy camp,
drew water from a cistern, and brought it to him. How
did David react? “Should I drink the blood of the men
going at the risk of their lives?” he asked. In David’s
eyes, the water was, in e?ect, the lifeblood of his men.
So despite his thirst, he “poured it out to Jehovah.”
—2 Samuel 23:15-17.
8

Some 2,400 years after the Noachian decree and

about 1,500 years after the Law covenant was made,
Jehovah inspired the governing body of the early
7. How did David show respect for the sanctity of blood?
8, 9. Did God’s view of life and blood change with the establishment
of the Christian congregation? Explain.
98

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Christian congregation to write: “The holy spirit and
we ourselves have favored adding no further burden
to you except these necessary things: to keep abstaining from things sacri?ced to idols, from blood,
from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality.”
—Acts 15:28, 29.
9

Clearly, the early governing body discerned that

blood is sacred and that misusing it is as morally
wrong as participating in idolatry or committing sexual immorality. True Christians today accept that
stand. Moreover, because they think in terms of Bible
principles, they are able to please Jehovah when making decisions about the use of blood.
10

THE MEDICAL USE OF BLO OD
Jehovah’s Witnesses recognize that “abstaining

from . . . blood” means not accepting blood transfusions and not donating or storing their own blood for
transfusion. Out of respect for God’s law, they also do
not accept the four primary components of blood: red
cells, white cells, platelets, and plasma.
10, 11. (a) How do Jehovah’s Witnesses view the transfusion of
whole blood and primary blood components? (b) In what areas regarding blood might Christians have di?ering opinions?
Do You Value Life as God Does?

99

RESPECT THE LIFE OF ANIMALS
Although Jehovah allows us to kill animals for
food and clothing or to protect ourselves from
harm, we must exercise that authority in a balanced, kind way. (Genesis 3:21; 9:3) We do not
want to be like the cruel hunter Nimrod, who
apparently killed animals for the sheer thrill of
it. (Genesis 10:9) Rather, we should imitate Jehovah, who is interested in the welfare of all animals, even tiny sparrows.—Jonah 4:11; Matthew
10:29.
God’s interest was re?ected in the Mosaic Law.
(Exodus 23:4, 5, 12; Deuteronomy 22:10; 25:4) In
harmony with that Law, Proverbs 12:10 states:
“The righteous one takes care of his domestic
animals, but even the mercy of the wicked is
cruel.” Soon both the wicked and their ways will
be things of the past.
11

Today, through further processing, these com-

ponents are often broken down into fractions that are
used in a variety of ways. Could a Christian accept
such fractions? Does he view them as “blood”? Each
one must personally decide on this matter. The same
applies to such medical procedures as hemodialysis,
100

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

hemodilution, and cell salvage involving one’s own
blood, provided that it has not been stored.—See the
Appendix, pages 277-280.
12

Are matters for p ersonal decision of little

importance to Jehovah? No, for he is keenly interested in our thoughts and motivations. (Read Proverbs
17:3; 24:12.) So after doing prayerful research on a
medical product or procedure, we should heed our
Bible-trained conscience. (Romans 14:2, 22, 23) Of
course, others should not impose their conscience on
us, nor should we ask, “What would you do if you
were in my situation?” In such matters, each Christian
should “carry his own load.”1—Galatians 6:5; Romans
14:12; see the box “Do I View Blood as Sacred?” on
page 104.

13

JEHOVAH’S LAWS
REFLECT HIS FATHERLY LOVE
The laws and principles found in the Bible reveal

1 See Awake! of August 2006, pages 3-12, published by Jehovah’s
Witnesses.

12. How should we view and handle matters of conscience?
13. What do Jehovah’s laws and principles reveal about him? Illustrate.
Do You Value Life as God Does?

101

Jehovah to be both a wise Legislator and a loving Father who deeply cares about the welfare of his children. (Psalm 19:7-11) Although the command to “abstain from . . . blood” was not given as a health
regulation, it does shield us from complications related to blood transfusions. (Acts 15:20) In fact, many in
the medical ?eld rate bloodless surgery as the “gold
standard” of modern medical care. To true Christians,
such developments simply con?rm Jehovah’s unfathomable wisdom and fatherly love.—Read Isaiah 55:9;
John 14:21, 23.
14

God’s concern for the welfare of his people in

ancient Israel was re?ected in many of his laws. For
example, he required that Israelite houses have a
parapet around the roof to prevent accidents, since
roofs were places of considerable activity. (Deuteronomy 22:8; 1 Samuel 9:25, 26; Nehemiah 8:16;
Acts 10:9) God also commanded that dangerous
bulls be kept under guard. (Exodus 21:28, 29) To ignore these requirements showed a gross lack of
14, 15. (a) God’s love for his people was re?ected in what laws?
(b) How can you apply the principles behind these safety regulations?
102

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

respect for the welfare of others and could have resulted in bloodguilt.
15

How can you apply the principles underlying

these laws? Why not think about your vehicle, your
driving habits, your animals, your home, your place
of work, and your choice of recreation? In some lands,
accidents are the leading cause of death among the
young, often because they take needless risks. However, young ones who want to remain in God’s love
value life and do not seek excitement in dangerous
activities. They do not foolishly think that youth
spells invulnerability. Rather, they enjoy their youth
by warding o? harmful things.—Ecclesiastes 11:9, 10.
16

Even the life of the unborn is precious in God’s

eyes. In ancient Israel, if someone harmed a pregnant
woman and either she or her baby died as a result, God
considered the guilty party a manslayer, and he had
to pay “life for life.”1 (Read Exodus 21:22, 23.) Imagine,
1 Bible lexicographers state that the wording of the Hebrew text
“apparently renders it impracticable to refer the words to injury
done to the woman alone.” Note, too, that the Bible says nothing
about the age of the embryo or fetus being a factor in Jehovah’s
judgment.

16. What Bible principle applies to abortion? (See also footnote.)
Do You Value Life as God Does?

103

D O I VIEW BLO OD AS SACRED?
Principle: “Abstain from . . . blood.”
—Acts 15:20.
Some questions to ask yourself
? How would I describe the di?erence between
the four primary components of blood and
blood fractions?1
? Why should I decide for myself whether I
will accept or reject blood fractions or certain
medical procedures involving the use of my own
blood?—Romans 12:2; Galatians 6:5.
? How would I explain to my physician why
I accept or reject the use of blood fractions?
—Proverbs 13:16.
1 See the Appendix, pages 277-278, for detailed information.

then, how Jehovah must feel when he sees countless
unborn babies deliberately aborted each year, many
sacri?ced on the altars of expediency and sexual liberation.
17

What, though, about a woman who had an abor-

17. How would you comfort someone who had an abortion prior to
learning about God’s standards?
104

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tion prior to coming to a knowledge of Bible truth? Is
she beyond God’s mercy? Not at all! In fact, a truly
repentant person can count on Jehovah’s forgiveness
based on Jesus’ shed blood. (Psalm 103:8-14; Ephesians 1:7) Indeed, Christ himself said: “I have come to
call, not righteous people, but sinners to repentance.”
—Luke 5:32.
18

AVOID HURTFUL THINKING!
Beyond our simply not harming others, Jehovah

wants us to root out of our heart the very cause
of much bloodshed—hatred. “Everyone who hates
his brother is a murderer,” wrote the apostle John.
(1 John 3:15) Such a person does not merely dislike
his brother but wishes him dead. His enmity may surface in the form of vicious slander or false accusations
that if true would merit divine judgment. (Leviticus
19:16; Deuteronomy 19:18-21; Matthew 5:22) How important, then, that we work at ridding our hearts of
any ill will that may lodge there!—James 1:14, 15; 4:
1-3.
18. How does the Bible address the underlying cause of much bloodshed?
Do You Value Life as God Does?

105

19

Those who value life as Jehovah does and who

want to keep themselves in his love also avoid violence in all its forms. Says Psalm 11:5: “He hates
anyone who loves violence.” That text is more than
a statement about God’s personality; it is a guiding
principle for life. It moves lovers of God to avoid
any form of entertainment that may foster a taste
for violence. Likewise, the statement that Jehovah is
“the God of peace” impels his servants to ?ll their
minds and hearts with lovable, virtuous, and praiseworthy things, which make for peace.—Read Philippians 4:8, 9.

20

STAY CLEAR OF BLO OD GUILTY
ORGANIZATIONS
In God’s eyes, Satan’s entire world is bloodguilty.

Its political systems, portrayed in the Scriptures as vicious beasts, have slaughtered countless millions, including many of Jehovah’s servants. (Daniel 8:3, 4, 2022; Revelation 13:1, 2, 7, 8) Hand in hand with these
beastlike powers, business and science have worked to
19. How does a person who is governed by Bible principles view such
texts as Psalm 11:5 and Philippians 4:8, 9?
20-22. What stand do Christians take toward the world, and why?
106

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

create some of the most heinous weapons imaginable,
making huge pro?ts in the process. How true that
“the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked
one”!—1 John 5:19.
21

Because Jesus’ followers are “no part of the

world” but remain strictly neutral toward its politics and wars, they avoid personal and community
bloodguilt.1 (John 15:19; 17:16) And in imitation of
Christ, they do not respond violently when others
persecute them. Rather, they show love for their enemies, even praying for them.—Matthew 5:44; Romans 12:17-21.
22

Above all, true Christians avoid involvement with

“Babylon the Great,” the world empire of false religion and the most bloodguilty of all. “In her,” says
God’s Word, “was found the blood of prophets and of
holy ones and of all those who have been slaughtered
on the earth.” Thus, we are warned: “Get out of her,
my people.”—Revelation 17:6; 18:2, 4, 24.
23

Abandoning Babylon the Great involves more

1 See Chapter 5, “How to Keep Separate From the World.”

23. What does it mean to get out of Babylon the Great?
Do You Value Life as God Does?

107

than having one’s name removed from a membership roll. It also includes hating the evil practices
that false religion condones or openly advocates
—such things as immorality, political meddling, and
the greedy pursuit of wealth. (Read Psalm 97:10; Revelation 18:7, 9, 11-17) How often these activities lead
to bloodshed!
24

Before taking up true worship, each of us, in one

way or another, lent support to Satan’s system and
thus incurred a measure of bloodguilt. However,
because we changed our ways, cultivated faith in
Christ’s ransom sacri?ce, and dedicated our life to
God, we gained God’s mercy and spiritual protection. (Acts 3:19) That protection reminds us of the
cities of refuge in Bible times.—Numbers 35:11-15;
Deuteronomy 21:1-9.
25

How did that arrangement work? If an Israelite

accidentally caused another’s death, he was to ?ee
to one of the cities of refuge. After quali?ed judges
ruled on the matter, the accidental manslayer had to
24, 25. (a) On what basis can God show mercy to a repentant person who is bloodguilty? (b) This reminds us of what arrangement in
Bible times?
108

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

reside in the city of refuge until the death of the
high priest. Then he would be free to live elsewhere.
What a beautiful example of God’s mercy and of the
great value he places on human life! Similar to
those ancient cities of refuge is God’s provision,
based on Christ’s ransom sacri?ce, for protecting us
from death for accidentally violating God’s commandment about the sanctity of life and blood. Do
you value that provision? How can you show that
you do? One way is by inviting others to accept
God’s provision of protection, especially in view of
the fast-approaching “great tribulation.”—Matthew
24:21; 2 Corinthians 6:1, 2.
VALUE LIFE BY PREACHING THE
KINGD OM MES SAGE
26

The situation of God’s people in our day calls

to mind that of the ancient prophet Ezekiel, whom
Jehovah commissioned to serve as a spiritual watchman to the house of Israel. “When you hear a word
from my mouth you must warn them from me,” said
26-28. In what way is our situation today similar to that of the prophet Ezekiel, and how can we keep ourselves in God’s love?
Do You Value Life as God Does?

109

God. If Ezekiel were to neglect his commission, he
would be held personally responsible for the blood
of those executed when Jerusalem was called to account. (Ezekiel 33:7-9) But Ezekiel was obedient and
incurred no bloodguilt.
27

Today, we face the end of Satan’s entire world.

Thus, Jehovah’s Witnesses count it both an obligation and a privilege to proclaim God’s “day of vengeance” in conjunction with the Kingdom message.
(Isaiah 61:2; Matthew 24:14) Do you have a full
share in this vital work? The apostle Paul took
his preaching commission seriously. As a result, he
could say: “I am clean from the blood of all men,
for I have not held back from telling you all the
counsel of God.” (Acts 20:26, 27) What a ?ne example for us to imitate!
28

Of course, to keep ourselves in the warmth of

Jehovah’s fatherly love, we must do more than view
life and blood as Jehovah does. We also need to remain clean, or holy, in his eyes, as we shall see in
the following chapter.
110

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 8

God Loves Clean People
“With the pure you show
yourself pure.” —PSALM 18:26.
A MOTHER prepares her little boy to go out. She
makes sure that he is bathed and that his clothes are
neat and clean. She knows that good hygiene is crucial
to his health. She also recognizes that her son’s appearance re?ects on his parents.
2

Jehovah, our heavenly Father, wants his servants to

be clean, or pure. His Word says: “With the pure you
show yourself pure.”1 (Psalm 18:26) Jehovah loves us;
he knows that keeping clean is best for us. He also expects us as his Witnesses to re?ect favorably on him.
Indeed, our clean appearance and ?ne conduct will
bring glory to, not reproach on, Jehovah and his holy
name.—Ezekiel 36:22; read 1 Peter 2:12.
1 The original-language words rendered “pure” or “clean” sometimes describe physical cleanliness but more often moral or
spiritual cleanness.

1-3. (a) Why does a mother make sure that her son is neat and clean?
(b) Why does Jehovah want his worshippers to be clean, and what motivates us to want to keep ourselves clean?
God Loves Clean People

111

3

Knowing that God loves clean people motivates us

to keep clean. We want our way of life to bring honor
to him because we love him. We also want to remain in
his love. Let us, then, examine why we need to keep
clean, what being clean involves, and how we can keep
ourselves clean. Such an examination can help us to see
whether there are areas in which we need to make improvement.

WHY D O WE NEED TO KEEP CLEAN?
4 One way Jehovah leads us is by example. His Word
thus urges us to “become imitators of God.” (Ephesians 5:1) Here is the primary reason why we need to
keep clean: Jehovah, the God we worship, is clean,
pure, and holy in every respect.—Read Leviticus 11:
44, 45.
5

Jehovah’s cleanness, like so many of his qualities

and ways, is evident in his visible creations. (Romans 1:
20) The earth was designed to be a clean home for
humans. Jehovah has put into place ecological cycles
that clean our air and water. Certain microbes act as
a kind of sanitation department, transforming waste
4, 5. (a) What is the primary reason why we need to keep clean?
(b) How is Jehovah’s cleanness evident in his visible creations?
112

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

into harmless products. Scientists have utilized some of
these hungry microorganisms to clean up oil spills and
other pollution caused by human sel?shness and greed.
Obviously, cleanliness matters to “the Maker of the
earth.” (Jeremiah 10:12) It should also matter to us.
6

Another reason why we need to keep clean is that

Jehovah, our Sovereign Ruler, requires cleanness of his
worshippers. Under the Law that Jehovah gave to Israel, cleanness and worship were inseparable. The Law
speci?ed that on the Day of Atonement, the high priest
had to bathe not once but twice. (Leviticus 16:4, 23, 24)
O?ciating priests were required to wash their hands
and feet before o?ering sacri?ces to Jehovah. (Exodus 30:17-21; 2 Chronicles 4:6) The Law outlined some
70 causes of physical uncleanness and ceremonial de?lement. While in an unclean state, an Israelite could
not have any part in worship—in certain cases, under
penalty of death. (Leviticus 15:31) Anyone refusing to
undergo the required purifying procedure, including
bathing his body and washing his clothes, was to be “cut
o? from the congregation.”—Numbers 19:17-20.
6, 7. How did the Mosaic Law emphasize that cleanness was required
of those who worshipped Jehovah?
God Loves Clean People

113

Although we are not under the Mosaic Law, it gives
us insight into God’s thinking on matters. Clearly, the
Law emphasized that cleanness was required of those
who worshipped God. Jehovah has not changed. (Malachi 3:6) Our worship cannot be acceptable to him unless it is “clean and unde?led.” (James 1:27) We thus
need to know what he expects of us in this regard.
7

WHAT BEING CLEAN
IN G OD’S EYES INVOLVES
8 In the Bible, the idea of being clean means more
than just physical cleanness. Being clean in God’s eyes
touches all aspects of our lives. Jehovah expects us to
keep clean in four basic respects—spiritually, morally,
mentally, and physically. Let us consider what each of
these involves.
Spiritual cleanness. Put simply, keeping spiritually clean means not mixing true worship with false.
When the Israelites left Babylon to return to Jerusalem, they were to heed this inspired exhortation: “Get
out of there, touch nothing unclean! . . . Keep yourselves clean.” (Isaiah 52:11) The Israelites were return9

8. In what respects does Jehovah expect us to keep clean?
9, 10. What does it mean to keep spiritually clean, and what do true
Christians avoid?
114

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ing home primarily to restore Jehovah’s worship. That
worship had to be clean—not tainted by any of the
God-dishonoring teachings, practices, and customs of
Babylonish religion.
Today, we as true Christians must be careful not to
become contaminated by false worship. (Read 1 Corinthians 10:21.) Caution is essential in this regard, for the
in?uence of false religion is pervasive. In many lands,
various traditions, activities, and rituals are connected
with false religious teachings, such as the notion that
something inside us survives death. (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 6,
10) True Christians avoid customs involving false religious beliefs.1 We will not allow pressure from others
to cause us to compromise the Bible’s standards of
clean worship.—Acts 5:29.
10

Moral cleanness. To keep morally clean includes
avoiding sexual immorality of any kind. (Read Ephesians 5:5.) It is vital that we stay morally clean. As we
will see in the next chapter of this book, to remain in
God’s love, we must “?ee from sexual immorality.”
11

1 See Chapter 13 of this book for a discussion of speci?c celebrations and customs that true Christians avoid.

11. What does moral cleanness involve, and why is it vital that we keep
clean in this respect?
God Loves Clean People

115

Those who unrepentantly practice sexual immorality
“will not inherit God’s Kingdom.” (1 Corinthians 6:9,
10, 18) In God’s eyes, such ones are among those who
are “disgusting in their ?lth.” If they fail to keep morally clean, “their portion will be . . . the second death.”
—Revelation 21:8.
Mental cleanness. Thoughts lead to actions. If we allow wrong thoughts to take up residence in our mind
and heart, sooner or later we are bound to commit unclean deeds. (Matthew 5:28; 15:18-20) But if we ?ll our
mind with pure, clean thoughts, we can be motivated
to maintain conduct that is clean. (Read Philippians 4:8.)
How can we keep mentally clean? For one thing, we
need to avoid any form of entertainment that could
soil our thinking.1 In addition, we can ?ll our mind
with clean thoughts by regularly studying God’s Word.
—Psalm 19:8, 9.
12

To remain in God’s love, it is essential that we
keep ourselves spiritually, morally, and mentally clean.
These aspects of cleanness are discussed more fully in
13

1 How to choose wholesome entertainment is considered in Chapter 6 of this publication.

12, 13. What connection is there between thoughts and actions, and
how can we keep mentally clean?
116

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

other chapters of this publication. Let us here examine
the fourth aspect—physical cleanliness.

HOW CAN WE KEEP PHYSICALLY CLEAN?
14 Physical cleanliness involves keeping our body and
surroundings clean. Is such cleanliness a personal matter that should be of no concern to anyone else? That
could hardly be the case for worshippers of Jehovah.
As already noted, our physical cleanliness matters to
Jehovah not only because it is best for us but also because we re?ect on him. Think about the illustration
used at the outset. Seeing a child who is always dirty or
unkempt makes you wonder about his parents, does it
not? We would not want anything about our appearance or way of life to bring reproach on our heavenly
Father or to detract from the message we preach. God’s
Word says: “In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, so that no fault may be found with our ministry;
but in every way we recommend ourselves as God’s
ministers.” (2 Corinthians 6:3, 4) How, then, can we
keep physically clean?
15

Our personal hygiene and appearance. Although

14. Why is physical cleanliness not just a personal matter?
15, 16. What do good hygienic habits include, and what should be true
of our clothing?
God Loves Clean People

117

cultures and living conditions vary from country to
country, we can generally ?nd adequate soap and water to bathe regularly and to make sure that we and our
children are clean. Good hygienic habits include washing our hands with soap and water before eating or handling food, after using the toilet, and after washing or
changing a baby. Washing the hands with soap and water can prevent illness and actually save lives. It can
prevent the spread of harmful viruses and bacteria,
thus helping people avoid diarrheic diseases. In lands
where houses are not commonly connected to a sewage system, wastes can perhaps be disposed of by burying, as was done in ancient Israel.—Deuteronomy 23:
12, 13.
Our clothing too requires regular washing to be
clean and presentable. A Christian’s clothing need not
be expensive or the latest fashion, but it should be neat,
clean, and modest. (Read 1 Timothy 2:9, 10.) No matter
where we are, we want our appearance to “adorn the
teaching of our Savior, God.”—Titus 2:10.
16

Our home and surroundings. Our home may not be
fancy or luxurious, but it should be as clean and pre17

17. Why should our home and surroundings be clean and presentable?
118

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

sentable as circumstances permit. Likewise, if we use
an automobile for transportation to meetings and in
the ?eld ministry, we can do our best to keep it reasonably clean, inside and out. Let us not forget that a clean
home and surroundings are a witness in themselves. After all, we teach people that Jehovah is a clean God,
that he will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth,”
and that his Kingdom will soon transform our earthly
home into a paradise. (Revelation 11:18; Luke 23:43)
Surely we want the appearance of our home and belongings to show others that even now we are developing clean habits that will ?t in with the coming new
world.
Our place of worship. Our love for Jehovah moves us
to show respect for our Kingdom Hall, a center of true
worship in the area. When new ones come to the hall,
we want them to have a favorable impression of our
meeting place. Regular cleaning and maintenance are
needed in order to ensure that the hall remains appealing and attractive. We show respect for our Kingdom
Hall by doing what we can to keep it in good condition. It is a privilege to volunteer our time to assist in
18

18. How can we show respect for our Kingdom Hall?
God Loves Clean People

119

cleaning as well as “to mend and repair” our place of
worship. (2 Chronicles 34:10) The same principles apply when we meet at an Assembly Hall or another facility for assemblies or conventions.

CLEANSING OURSELVES OF DEFILING
HABITS AND PRACTICES
19 To keep ourselves physically clean, we need to
avoid de?ling habits and practices, such as smoking,
abusing alcohol, and the nonmedical use of addictive
or mind-altering substances. The Bible does not specifically name all the unclean and disgusting habits and
practices that are prevalent today, but it does contain
principles that enable us to perceive how Jehovah must
feel about such things. Because we know Jehovah’s
view of matters, our love for him moves us to take the
course that brings his approval. Let us consider ?ve
Scriptural principles.
20

“Since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us

cleanse ourselves of every de?lement of ?esh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Corinthians 7:1)
19. To keep ourselves physically clean, what do we need to avoid, and
how does the Bible help us in this regard?
20, 21. Jehovah wants us to be free of what type of practices, and
what powerful reason do we have to comply?
120

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

D O I FIGHT TO D O WHAT IS RIGHT?
Principle: “I pummel my body and lead it as a slave, so
that after I have preached to others, I myself should not
become disapproved somehow.”—1 Corinthians 9:27.
Some questions to ask yourself
? When I first feel the urge to engage in some defiling habit, do I pray for God’s spirit to help me
resist the impulse?—Matthew 6:13.
? How do the people I associate with, the movies
I watch, and the music I listen to affect my determination to remain free from bad habits?
—1 Peter 4:3, 4.
? Why does performing good works not justify
sinful conduct?—Matthew 23:25-28.
? Why am I willing to su?er in the same way
that Jesus su?ered for doing God’s will?—1 Peter
2:21; 4:1.
? How would I explain to someone why I choose
not to smoke?—Romans 12:1, 2.
? Do I realize that having a relapse with regard
to some unclean practice does not mean that I
am a complete failure?—Romans 7:21-25.
Jehovah wants us to be free of practices that pollute
our ?eshly body and damage our spirit, or dominant
mental attitude. We must therefore avoid addictive
God Loves Clean People

121

behaviors that are known to be harmful to physical and
mental health.
21

The Bible gives a powerful reason for us to “cleanse

ourselves of every de?lement.” Notice that 2 Corinthians 7:1 begins by saying: “Since we have these promises.” What promises? As mentioned in the preceding
verses, Jehovah promises: “I will take you in. And I will
become a father to you.” (2 Corinthians 6:17, 18) Just
imagine: Jehovah promises to put you under his protective care and to love you as a father does a son or a
daughter. But Jehovah will ful?ll these promises only
if you avoid de?lements of “?esh and spirit.” How foolish it would be, then, to allow any disgusting habit or
practice to rob you of such a precious and close relationship with Jehovah!
22

“You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart

and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.”
(Matthew 22:37) Jesus singled out this commandment
as the greatest of all. (Matthew 22:38) Jehovah deserves
such love from us. To love him with our whole heart,
soul, and mind, we must avoid practices that could
22-25. What Scriptural principles can help us to avoid unclean habits
and practices?
122

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

shorten our life or dull our God-given thinking abilities.
“[Jehovah] gives to all people life and breath and all
things.” (Acts 17:24, 25) Life is a gift from God. We love
the Giver, so we want to show respect for the gift. We
shun any habits or practices that are detrimental to our
health, for we recognize that such practices show a
gross disrespect for the gift of life.—Psalm 36:9.
23

“You must love your neighbor as yourself.” (Matthew
22:39) Unclean habits and practices often a?ect not
only the practicer but also those around him. For example, exposure to secondhand smoke can have a harmful
e?ect on nonsmokers. An individual who hurts those
around him is violating the divine requirement that we
love our neighbor. He also belies any claim that he
loves God.—1 John 4:20, 21.
24

“Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to
be obedient to governments and authorities.” (Titus 3:1)
In many lands, the possession or use of certain drugs
is a violation of the law. As true Christians, we do not
possess or use illegal drugs.—Romans 13:1.
25

26

To remain in God’s love, we need to keep clean, not

26. (a) To remain in God’s love, what do we need to do? (b) Why is
keeping clean in God’s eyes the best way to live?
God Loves Clean People

123

“WITH G OD ALL THINGS ARE PO SSIBLE”
“At age 15,” says Helen,1 “I was smoking cigarettes every day and drinking alcohol with my
friends on weekends. Later, although I was now a
single mother with three children, I became addicted to crack cocaine. My life was a mess. However, I started studying the Bible, and with Jehovah’s help, I cleaned up my life and broke free
from my addictions. It was a real struggle, especially to give up using cocaine. I think it would
have been impossible for me to make these changes on my own. But now I can truly say that in my
life, I have seen proof of Jesus’ words: ‘With God
all things are possible.’ ”—Matthew 19:26.
1 Name has been changed.

just in one or two respects but in all respects. Abandoning and keeping clear of de?ling habits and practices may not be easy, but it is possible.1 Really, there
is no better way to live, for Jehovah always teaches us
to bene?t ourselves. (Read Isaiah 48:17.) Most important, by keeping clean we can have the satisfaction that
comes from knowing that we are re?ecting favorably on
the God we love, thereby remaining in his love.
1 See the boxes “Do I Fight to Do What Is Right?” on page 121,
and “With God All Things Are Possible,” above.
124

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 9

“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”
“Deaden, therefore, your body members that are on
the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness,
uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and
greediness, which is idolatry.” —COLOSSIANS 3:5.
THE ?sherman goes down to his favorite spot. He
has a particular kind of ?sh in mind. He selects a
lure and casts his line into the water. Moments later, the line goes taut, the rod bends, and he reels in
his catch. Smiling, he knows he has chosen the right
lure.
2

In the year 1473 B.C.E., a man named Balaam

gave much thought to a lure. His intended prey,
though, were God’s people, who were camped on the
Plains of Moab, at the border of the Promised Land.
Balaam professed to be a prophet of Jehovah, but he
was really just a greedy man hired to curse Israel.
However, through Jehovah’s intervention, Balaam
was only able to bless Israel. Set on earning his
1, 2. How did Balaam scheme to cause harm to Jehovah’s people?
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

125

reward, Balaam reasoned that perhaps he could induce God to curse his own people, if only they could
be tempted to commit gross sin. With that goal in
mind, Balaam cast the lure—the seductive young
women of Moab.—Numbers 22:1-7; 31:15, 16; Revelation 2:14.
3

Did this strategy work? To an extent, yes. Tens of

thousands of Israelite men took the lure by committing “sexual immorality with the daughters of
Moab.” They even began to worship Moabite gods,
including the disgusting Baal of Peor, a god of fertility, or sex. As a result, 24,000 Israelites perished
right at the border of the Promised Land. What a
monumental tragedy that was!—Numbers 25:1-9.
4

What paved the way for this calamity? Many of

the people had developed a wicked heart by drawing
away from Jehovah, the very God who had delivered
them from Egypt, fed them in the wilderness, and led
them safely to the land of promise. (Hebrews 3:12)
Re?ecting on the matter, the apostle Paul wrote:
“Neither let us practice sexual immorality, as some
3. To what extent did Balaam’s scheme succeed?
4. Why did thousands of Israelites fall prey to immorality?
126

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

of them committed sexual immorality, only to fall,
23,000 of them in one day.”1—1 Corinthians 10:8.
The account in Numbers has many important
lessons for God’s people today, who stand at the
threshold of a far greater promised land. (1 Corinthians 10:11) For example, the world’s obsession
with sex re?ects that of the ancient Moabites but on
a larger scale. Moreover, each year thousands of
Christians fall prey to immorality—the same basic
lure that caught the Israelites. (2 Corinthians 2:11)
And in imitation of Zimri, who boldly paraded a
Midianite woman right into the Israelite camp to his
own tent, some who associate with God’s people today have become a corrupting in?uence within the
Christian congregation.—Numbers 25:6, 14; Jude 4.
5

Do you see yourself on the modern-day Plains of
Moab? Can you see your prize—the long-awaited
new world—on the horizon? If so, then do everything in your power to remain in God’s love by
6

1 The ?gure given in Numbers evidently included “the leaders” of
the people executed by the judges, which may have amounted to
1,000 men, and those executed directly by Jehovah.—Numbers 25:
4, 5.

5, 6. Why is the account about Israel’s sin on the Plains of Moab
valuable to us today?
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

127

heeding the command: “Flee from sexual immorality!”—1 Corinthians 6:18.
7

WHAT IS SEXUAL IMMORALITY?
As used in the Bible, “sexual immorality” (Greek,

por·neia) applies to illicit sexual relations outside of
Scriptural marriage. It includes adultery, prostitution, and sex relations between unmarried individuals, as well as oral and anal sex and the sexual manipulation of the genitals of an individual to whom
one is not married. It also includes such acts between individuals of the same sex as well as bestiality.1
8

The Scriptures are very clear: Those who practice

sexual immorality cannot remain in the Christian
congregation and will not receive everlasting life.
(1 Corinthians 6:9; Revelation 22:15) What is more,
even now they bring much harm to themselves in the
form of a loss of trust and self-respect, marital discord, a guilty conscience, unwanted pregnancies, dis1 For a discussion of the meaning of uncleanness and brazen conduct, see “Questions From Readers” in The Watchtower of July 15,
2006, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

7, 8. What is “sexual immorality,” and how do those who practice it
reap what they sow?
128

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ease, and even death. (Read Galatians 6:7, 8.) Why
start down a path that is littered with so much misery? Sadly, many do not think that far ahead when
they take the ?rst wrong step—which quite often involves pornography.
9

P ORNO GRAPHY—A FIRST STEP
In many lands, pornography is featured on news-

stands, in music, and on television, and it virtually saturates the Internet.1 Is it harmless, as some
claim? Absolutely not! Those who view pornography
may become habitual masturbators and nurture “uncontrolled sexual passion,” which may result in an
addiction to sex, perverted desires, serious marital
disharmony, and even divorce.2 (Romans 1:24-27;
Ephesians 4:19) A researcher likens sex addiction to
cancer. “It keeps growing and spreading,” he says. “It
rarely ever reverses itself, and it is also very di?cult
to treat and heal.”
1 “Pornography,” as used here, refers to the depiction in pictures,
in writing, or by voice of erotic material that is intended to cause
sexual excitement. Pornography may range from a picture of a person in an erotic pose to depictions of sexual acts of the most sordid
kind between two or more individuals.
2 Masturbation is discussed in the Appendix, pages 280-282.

9. Is pornography harmless, as some claim? Explain.
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

129

10

Consider the words recorded at James 1:14, 15,

which reads: “Each one is tried by being drawn out
and enticed by his own desire. Then the desire, when
it has become fertile, gives birth to sin; in turn sin,
when it has been carried out, brings forth death.” So
10. In what ways can we apply the principle found at James 1:14, 15?
(See also the box “Finding the Strength to B e Morally Clean.”)

FINDING THE STRENGTH TO
BE MORALLY CLEAN
“While in my teens, I became trapped in a
cycle of viewing pornography and masturbating,”
says a young man. “My peers at school considered such conduct a normal part of adolescence.
But it damaged my conscience, and I was drawn
into a life of immorality. I eventually realized
that I was just a slave to my desires. However, I
was able to overcome my unclean habits with
help from Jehovah and the congregation. Now I
am careful about whom I associate with, since I
know that others can have a big in?uence on me.
I have found that regular prayer and personal Bible study are essential to keep me from falling
back into bad habits. Instead of being a slave to
?eshly desires, I now have the privilege of serving as a regular pioneer.”
130

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

if a bad desire enters your mind, take immediate action to get rid of it! For example, if you inadvertently see erotic images, quickly look away, or turn o?
the computer, or change the TV channel. Do whatever is necessary to avoid succumbing to immoral desire before it races out of control and overcomes
you!—Read Matthew 5:29, 30.
11

For good reason, the One who knows us better

than we know ourselves exhorts: “Deaden, therefore,
your body members that are on the earth as respects
sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and greediness, which is
idolatry.” (Colossians 3:5) True, doing so may be a
challenge. But remember, we have a loving and patient heavenly Father to call on. (Psalm 68:19) So
turn quickly to him when wrong thoughts enter your
mind. Pray for “power beyond what is normal,” and
force your mind to focus on other matters.—2 Corinthians 4:7; 1 Corinthians 9:27; see the box “How
Can I Break a Bad Habit?” on page 134.
11. When ?ghting wrong desires, how can we demonstrate our trust in
Jehovah?
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

131

The wise man Solomon wrote: “Above all the
things that you guard, safeguard your heart, for out
12

of it are the sources of life.” (Proverbs 4:23) Our
“heart” is our inner self, what we really are as a person in God’s eyes. Moreover, it is God’s estimation
of our “heart”—not what we may appear to be in the
eyes of others—that determines whether we receive
everlasting life or not. It is that simple. It is also that
serious. So that he would not look improperly at a
woman, faithful Job made a covenant, or formal
agreement, with his eyes. (Job 31:1) What a ?ne example for us! Showing the same mind, a psalmist
prayed: “Turn my eyes away from looking at what is
worthless.”—Psalm 119:37.
13

DINAH’S UNWISE CHOICE
As we saw in Chapter 3, our friends can exert a

powerful in?uence on us for good or for bad. (Proverbs 13:20; read 1 Corinthians 15:33.) Consider the example of Dinah, a daughter of the patriarch Jacob.
Despite her good upbringing, Dinah unwisely made
friends with Canaanite girls. Like the Moabites, the
12. What is our “heart,” and why must we safeguard it?
13. Who was Dinah, and why was her choice of friends unwise?
132

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Canaanites were notoriously immoral. (Leviticus 18:
6-25) In the eyes of Canaanite men, including Shechem—“the most honorable” of his father’s household—Dinah seemed to be legitimate prey.—Genesis
34:18, 19.
14

Dinah probably did not have sexual relations

in mind when she saw Shechem. He, though, did
what most Canaanites would have considered natural when sexually aroused. Any last-minute resistance on Dinah’s part meant little, for he “took her”
and “violated her.” It seems that Shechem later “fell
in love” with Dinah, but that did not change what he
had done to her. (Read Genesis 34:1-4.) And Dinah
was not the only one to su?er as a result. Her choice
of associates triggered events that brought disgrace
and reproach on her whole family.—Genesis 34:7, 2531; Galatians 6:7, 8.
15

If Dinah learned an important lesson, she

learned it the hard way. Those who love and obey Jehovah do not have to learn life’s lessons the hard
14. How did Dinah’s choice of friends lead to tragedy?
15, 16. How can we gain true wisdom? (See also the box on
page 141.)
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

133

HOW CAN I BREAK A BAD HABIT?
Principle: “O you who love Jehovah,
hate what is bad.”—Psalm 97:10.
Some questions to ask yourself
? Am I avoiding situations that might stimulate
wrong desires?—Matthew 5:27, 28.
? Do I meditate on the consequences of acting
on wrong desires?—Proverbs 22:3.
? What type of decisive action am I willing
to take to overcome my bad habit?—Matthew 5:
29, 30.
? Am I prepared to talk to a parent or a spiritually mature friend about my problem?—Proverbs
1:8, 9; Galatians 6:1, 2.
? How can I demonstrate that I rely on Jehovah’s
strength and wisdom to gain the victory?
—Proverbs 3:5, 6; James 1:5.
way. Because they listen to God, they choose to
‘walk with the wise.’ (Proverbs 13:20a) Thus they
come to understand “the entire course of what
is good” and avoid needless problems and pains.
—Proverbs 2:6-9; Psalm 1:1-3.
Godly wisdom is available to all who yearn for
it and who act on that yearning by persisting in
16

134

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

prayer and by regularly studying God’s Word and the
material provided by the faithful and discreet slave.
(Matthew 24:45; James 1:5) Also important is humility, which is re?ected in a willingness to heed Scriptural counsel. (2 Kings 22:18, 19) For example, a
Christian may accept in principle that his heart can
be treacherous and desperate. (Jeremiah 17:9) But
when the situation calls for it, is he humble enough
to accept speci?c, loving counsel and help?
17

Imagine this situation. A father does not allow

his daughter and a young Christian man to go out
unchaperoned. The girl responds: “But Dad, don’t
you trust me? We won’t do anything wrong!” She
may love Jehovah and have the best of intentions, yet
is she walking “in [godly] wisdom”? Is she ‘?eeing
from sexual immorality’? Or is she foolishly trusting
“in [her] own heart”? (Proverbs 28:26) Perhaps you
can think of additional principles that would assist
such a father and his daughter in reasoning on the
matter.—See Proverbs 22:3; Matthew 6:13; 26:41.
17. Describe a situation that may arise within a family, and show how
a father might reason with his daughter.
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

135

JO SEPH FLED FROM SEXUAL IMMORALITY
18 A ?ne young person who loved God and ?ed
from sexual immorality was Joseph, Dinah’s half
brother. (Genesis 30:20-24) As a child, Joseph saw
?rsthand the fruits of his sister’s folly. No doubt
these memories, as well as Joseph’s desire to remain
in God’s love, protected him years later in Egypt
when his master’s wife tried to seduce him “day after day.” Of course, as a slave Joseph could not simply hand in his resignation and leave! He had to deal
with the situation wisely and courageously. This he
did by repeatedly saying no to Potiphar’s wife and,
in the end, by ?eeing from her.—Read Genesis 39:
7-12.
19

Consider: If Joseph had fantasized about the

woman or had habitually daydreamed about sex,
would he have been able to keep his integrity? Most
likely not. Instead of entertaining sinful thoughts, Joseph prized his relationship with Jehovah, which was
evident in his words to Potiphar’s wife. “My master,”
he would say, “has not withheld from me anything
18, 19. What temptation arose in Joseph’s life, and how did he deal
with it?
136

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

at all except you, because you are his wife. So how
could I commit this great badness and actually sin
against God?”—Genesis 39:8, 9.
20

Imagine the joy that Jehovah must have felt as

he observed young Joseph, far from his family, maintaining his integrity day after day. (Proverbs 27:
11) Later, Jehovah maneuvered matters so that Joseph was not only released from prison but also
made Egypt’s prime minister and food administrator!
(Genesis 41:39-49) How true the words of Psalm 97:
10: “O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He
is guarding the lives of his loyal ones; he rescues
them from the hand of the wicked”!
21

Likewise today, many servants of God demon-

strate that they “hate what is bad, and love what is
good.” (Amos 5:15) A young brother in an African
land recalls that a female classmate boldly o?ered
him sex in exchange for his help during a mathematics test. “I immediately rejected her o?er,” he says.
“By maintaining integrity, I have kept my dignity
and self-respect, which are far more valuable than
20. How did Jehovah maneuver matters in the case of Joseph?
21. How did a young brother in an African land show moral courage?
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

137

gold and silver.” True, sin may give “temporary enjoyment,” but such cheap thrills often bring much
pain. (Hebrews 11:25) Moreover, they pale into insigni?cance when compared with the lasting happiness that results from obedience to Jehovah.—Proverbs 10:22.
ACCEPT HELP FROM THE G OD OF MERCY
22 Being imperfect, we all struggle to subdue ?eshly desires and do what is right in God’s eyes. (Romans 7:21-25) Jehovah is aware of this, “remembering that we are dust.” (Psalm 103:14) Sometimes,
though, a Christian may commit a serious sin. Is
his situation hopeless? By no means! Granted, the
wrongdoer may reap bitter fruitage, as did King David. Nevertheless, God is always “ready to forgive”
those who are contrite and “openly confess” their
sins.—Psalm 86:5; James 5:16; read Proverbs 28:13.
23

In addition, God has kindly provided the Chris-

tian congregation with “gifts in men”—mature spiritual shepherds who are both quali?ed and eager to
render help. (Ephesians 4:8, 12; James 5:14, 15) Their
22, 23. (a) If a Christian commits a serious sin, why is his situation
not hopeless? (b) What help is available to a wrongdoer?
138

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

goal is to assist a wrongdoer in restoring his relationship with God and, in the words of the wise man, in
acquiring “understanding” so that he does not repeat
the sin.—Proverbs 15:32.
24

‘ACQUIRE G O OD SENSE’
The Bible speaks of a person “lacking good

sense” and of one who “acquires understanding.”
(Proverbs 7:7) Because of spiritual immaturity and
inexperience in God’s service, someone “lacking
good sense” may lack discernment and good judgment. Like the young man described at Proverbs 7:
6-23, he may more readily fall victim to serious sin.
However, “whoever acquires good sense” gives serious attention to the inner person by means of regular, prayerful study of God’s Word. And to the extent possible in his imperfect state, he harmonizes
his thoughts, desires, emotions, and goals in life with
what God approves. Thus he “loves himself,” or
blesses himself, and “will ?nd success.”—Proverbs
19:8.
24, 25. (a) How did the young man described at Proverbs 7:623 show that he was “lacking good sense”? (b) How can we ‘acquire
good sense’?
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

139

Ask yourself: ‘Am I fully convinced that God’s
standards are right? Do I ?rmly believe that adherence to them results in the greatest happiness?’
(Psalm 19:7-10; Isaiah 48:17, 18) If you have even
a tiny doubt, address the situation. Meditate on
the consequences of ignoring God’s laws. In addition, “taste and see that Jehovah is good” by living the truth and by ?lling your mind with wholesome thoughts—things that are true, righteous,
chaste, lovable, and virtuous. (Psalm 34:8; Philippians 4:8, 9) You can be sure that the more you do so,
the more you grow to love God, to love what he
loves, and to hate what he hates. Joseph was no superman. Yet, he was able to “?ee from sexual immorality” because he allowed Jehovah to mold him over
many years, to give him good sense. May the same
be true of you.—Isaiah 64:8.
25

Our Creator formed our reproductive organs,
not to be toys for mere thrills, but to enable us to
reproduce and to enjoy intimacy within marriage.
(Proverbs 5:18) God’s view of marriage will be discussed in the following two chapters.
26

26. What important topic will be considered next?
140

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

S CRIPTURES FOR MEDITATION
“O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad.”
—Psalm 97:10.
“Everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so
as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.”
—Matthew 5:28.
“Whoever practices sexual immorality is sinning against his own body.”—1 Corinthians 6:18.
“I pummel my body and lead it as a slave, so
that after I have preached to others, I myself
should not become disapproved somehow.”
—1 Corinthians 9:27.
“Whatever a person is sowing, this he will also
reap; because the one sowing with a view to his
?esh will reap corruption from his ?esh, but the
one sowing with a view to the spirit will
reap everlasting life from the spirit.”
—Galatians 6:7, 8.
“Deaden, therefore, your body members that
are on the earth as respects sexual immorality,
uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion.”
—Colossians 3:5.
“Each one of you should know how to control
his own body in holiness and honor, not with
greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion.”
—1 Thessalonians 4:4, 5.
“Flee From Sexual Immorality!”

141

CHAPTER 10

Marriage—A Gift From
a Loving God
“A threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart.”
—ECCLESIASTES 4:12.

DO YOU enjoy going to weddings? Many do, for
such occasions can be very pleasant. You see the
couple looking their best. Better yet, there is such
joy on their faces! On this day, they are all smiles,
and their future seems full of hope and promise.
2

Still, it must be admitted that in many respects

the institution of marriage is in a shambles today.
While we hope for the best for newly married couples, we may at times wonder: ‘Will this marriage be
happy? Will it last?’ The answers to those questions
will depend on whether husband and wife trust and
apply God’s counsel on marriage. (Read Proverbs 3:
5, 6.) They need to do so in order to remain in God’s
love. Let us now focus on the Bible’s answer to these
1, 2. (a) Regarding new marriages, what may we at times wonder,
and why? (b) What questions will we discuss in this chapter?
142

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

four questions: Why get married? If you marry,
whom should you choose for a mate? How can you
prepare for marriage? And what can help a couple
to remain happily married?
3

WHY GET MARRIED?
Some believe that marriage is essential to happi-

ness—that you cannot ?nd ful?llment or joy in life
unless you ?nd a mate. That is simply untrue! Jesus,
a single man, spoke of singleness as a gift and urged
those who could to make room for it. (Matthew 19:
11, 12) The apostle Paul too discussed the advantages of singleness. (1 Corinthians 7:32-38) Neither
Jesus nor Paul made a rule in this regard; in fact,
forbidding marriage is listed among “teachings of demons.” (1 Timothy 4:1-3) Still, singleness has much
to o?er those who want to serve Jehovah without
distraction. It would not be wise, then, to marry for
trivial reasons, such as peer pressure.
4

On the other hand, are there valid reasons to get

married? Yes. Marriage too is a gift from our loving
3. Why would it be unwise to marry for trivial reasons?
4. A good marriage provides what foundation for child-rearing?
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

143

God. (Read Genesis 2:18.) So it has certain advantages
and the potential for bringing blessings. For instance, a good marriage is the best foundation for
family life. Children need a stable environment with
parents to raise them, providing love, discipline, and
guidance. (Psalm 127:3; Ephesians 6:1-4) However,
child-rearing is not the only reason for marriage.
5

Consider the theme scripture for this chapter

along with its context: “Two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work.
For if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. But what will happen to the one who falls
with no one to help him up? Moreover, if two lie
down together, they will stay warm, but how can just
one keep warm? And someone may overpower one
alone, but two together can take a stand against him.
And a threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart.”
—Ecclesiastes 4:9-12.
6

Primarily, this passage is about the value of

friendship. Marriage, of course, involves the closest
5, 6. (a) According to Ecclesiastes 4:9-12, what are some of the practical bene?ts of a close friendship? (b) How can a marriage be like a
threefold cord?
144

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

of friendships. As this scripture shows, such a union
can provide assistance, comfort, and protection. A
marriage is especially strong if it is more than a
bond between just two people. A twofold cord, as
this verse implies, might be torn apart. But three
strands woven or braided together would be much
harder to tear apart. When pleasing Jehovah is the
prime concern of both husband and wife, their marriage is like that threefold cord. Jehovah is a real
part of the marriage, so the union is very strong indeed.
7

Marriage is also the only context in which sexu-

al desires can be properly satis?ed. In this setting,
the sexual union is rightly viewed as a source of delight. (Proverbs 5:18) When a single person is past
what the Bible calls “the bloom of youth”—that time
when sexual urges ?rst become strong—he or she
may still struggle with sexual desires. Uncontrolled,
such desires could lead to unclean or improper conduct. Paul was inspired to pen this counsel for single
7, 8. (a) What counsel did Paul pen for single Christians who struggle with sexual desires? (b) The Bible gives us what realistic view of
marriage?
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

145

people: “If they do not have self-control, let them
marry, for it is better to marry than to be in?amed
with passion.”—1 Corinthians 7:9, 36; James 1:15.
Whatever reasons motivate a person to marry, it
is good to be realistic. As Paul put it, those who marry “will have tribulation in their ?esh.” (1 Corinthians 7:28) Married people face challenges that single
people will not face. If you choose to marry, though,
how can you minimize the challenges and maximize
the blessings? One way is to choose a mate wisely.
8

WHO WOULD MAKE A
G O OD MARRIAGE MATE?
9 Paul was inspired to write down a vital principle
that should be applied when choosing a marriage
mate: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers.” (2 Corinthians 6:14) His illustration was
based on a fact of agricultural life. If two animals
that di?er greatly in size or strength are yoked together, both will su?er. Similarly, yoked together by
marriage, a believer and an unbeliever will undoubtedly face friction and strains. If one mate wants to
9, 10. (a) How did Paul illustrate the danger of forming close bonds
with unbelievers? (b) What often results from ignoring God’s counsel
not to marry an unbeliever?
146

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

remain in Jehovah’s love and the other cares little or
nothing about that, their priorities in life will not
match, and much discomfort is likely to result. Paul
thus urged Christians to marry “only in the Lord.”
—1 Corinthians 7:39.
10

In some cases, single Christians have come to

the conclusion that an uneven yoking would be better than the loneliness they currently feel. Some decide to ignore Bible counsel, and they marry a person who does not serve Jehovah. Again and again,
the outcome is sad. Such ones ?nd themselves married to a person with whom they cannot share the
most important things in life. The loneliness that results may be far greater than any that they experienced before they married. Happily, there are many
thousands of single Christians who trust in and loyally adhere to divine counsel in this regard. (Read
Psalm 32:8.) Though hoping to marry someday, they
remain single until they ?nd a mate among those
who worship Jehovah God.
11

Of course, not every servant of Jehovah is

11. What can help you to choose a marriage mate wisely? (See also
the box on page 150.)
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

147

automatically a suitable marriage mate. If you are
considering marriage, look for someone whose personality, spiritual goals, and love for God are compatible with your own. The faithful and discreet
slave has provided much food for thought on this
subject, and you would do well to consider such
Scriptural counsel prayerfully, letting it guide you in
making this important decision.1—Read Psalm 119:
105.
12

In many lands, it is customary for parents to

choose a mate for their child. It is widely agreed in
those cultures that parents have the greater wisdom
and experience needed to make such an important
choice. Arranged marriages often work out well, as
they did in Bible times. The example of Abraham
sending his servant to ?nd a wife for Isaac is instructive to parents who may be in a similar position today. Money and social standing were not Abraham’s
concern. Rather, he went to great lengths to ?nd a
1 See chapter 2 of The Secret of Family Happiness, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

12. What custom regarding marriage prevails in many lands, and what
Bible example o?ers some guidance?
148

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

wife for Isaac among people who worshipped Jehovah.1—Genesis 24:3, 67.

13

HOW CAN YOU PREPARE FOR A
SUCCES SFUL MARRIAGE?
If you are thinking seriously about marriage, you

would do well to ask yourself, ‘Am I really ready?’
The answer does not simply lie in your feelings
about love, sex, companionship, or child rearing.
Rather, there are speci?c goals that each prospective
husband or wife should think about.
14

A young man who seeks a wife should think care-

fully about this principle: “Prepare your outside
work, and get everything ready in the ?eld; then
build your house.” (Proverbs 24:27) What is the
point? In those days, if a man wanted to establish a
family by getting married, he needed to ask himself,
‘Am I ready to care for and support a wife and any
1 Some faithful patriarchs had more than one wife. When Jehovah dealt with the patriarchs and with ?eshly Israel, he tolerated
the practice of polygamy. He did not institute it, but he did regulate it. However, Christians keep in mind that Jehovah no longer
allows polygamy among his worshippers.—Matthew 19:9; 1 Timothy 3:2.

13-15. (a) How can the principle found at Proverbs 24:27 help a
young man who is thinking about marriage? (b) What can a young woman do to prepare for marriage?
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

149

WHAT AM I LO OKING FOR IN A MATE?
Principle: “The two will be one flesh.”
—Matthew 19:5.
Some questions to ask yourself
? Why is it important to be “past the bloom of
youth” before marrying?—1 Corinthians 7:36; 13:
11; Matthew 19:4, 5.
? Although I am old enough to marry, how can I
bene?t from staying single for a period of time?
—1 Corinthians 7:32-34, 37, 38.
? If I choose to marry, why is it important that
my prospective mate have a record of faithful
service to Jehovah?—1 Corinthians 7:39.
? How can the following scriptures help a sister
to identify the qualities needed in a mate?
—Psalm 119:97; 1 Timothy 3:1-7.
? How could Proverbs 31:10-31 help a brother
choose a marriage mate wisely?
children who might come along?’ He had to work
?rst, caring for his ?elds, or crops. The same principle applies today. A man who wants to marry needs
to prepare for the responsibility. As long as he is
physically able, he will have to work. God’s Word in150

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

dicates that a man who does not care for the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of his family is
worse than one without faith!—Read 1 Timothy 5:8.
15

A woman who decides to marry is likewise agree-

ing to shoulder a number of weighty responsibilities.
The Bible praises some of the skills and qualities
that a wife may need as she helps her husband and
cares for her household. (Proverbs 31:10-31) Men
and women who rush into marriage without preparing to take on the responsibilities involved are really being sel?sh, failing to think of what they can
o?er a potential mate. Most of all, though, those
contemplating marriage need to be prepared spiritually.
16

Preparing for marriage involves meditating on

the roles that God has assigned to husband and wife.
A man needs to know what it means to be the head
of a Christian household. This role is not a license
to act as a tyrant. Rather, he must imitate the
manner in which Jesus exercises headship. (Ephesians 5:23) Likewise, a Christian woman needs to
16, 17. Those preparing for marriage should meditate on what Scriptural principles?
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

151

understand the digni?ed role of the wife. Will she be
willing to submit to “the law of her husband”? (Romans 7:2) She is already under the law of Jehovah
and of Christ. (Galatians 6:2) Her husband’s authority in the household represents another law. Can she
be supportive and submissive when it comes to the
authority of an imperfect man? If that prospect is
not appealing, she does well to refrain from marrying.
17

Further, each mate needs to be ready to care for

the special needs of the other. (Read Philippians 2:4.)
Paul wrote: “Each one of you must love his wife as
he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should
have deep respect for her husband.” Under divine inspiration, Paul saw that the man has a special need
to sense his wife’s deep respect for him. And the
woman has a special need to feel loved by her husband.—Ephesians 5:21-33.
18

Courtship, then, is not merely a time to have fun.

It is a time for a man and a woman to learn how to
deal properly with each other, to see whether mar18. Why should couples exercise self-control during courtship?
152

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

riage would be a wise choice. It is also a time to exercise self-control! The temptation to become physically intimate can be very strong—after all, the attraction is natural. However, those who truly love
each other will avoid any acts that could harm a
loved one spiritually. (1 Thessalonians 4:6) So if you
are courting, exercise self-control; you can bene?t
from that quality throughout your life, whether you
marry or not.

19

HOW CAN YOU MAKE A
MARRIAGE LAST?
If a couple is to make their marriage last, they

need to have the right view of commitment. In novels and movies, a marriage often provides the happy
ending that people crave. In real life, though, marriage is not an ending; it is a beginning—the start of
something that Jehovah designed to last. (Genesis 2:
24) Sadly, that is not the common view in today’s
world. In some cultures, people speak of marrying
as “tying the knot.” They may not realize how aptly that illustration describes the common view of
19, 20. How should a Christian’s view of marriage di?er from that of
many in today’s world? Illustrate.
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

153

marriage. How so? While a good knot should hold
fast as long as it is needed, another key requirement
is that it can be tied and untied with ease.
20

Many today see marriage as temporary. They en-

ter into it readily enough because they think that it
will suit their needs, but they expect to be able to
get out of it as soon as it seems to be challenging.
Remember, though, the illustration that the Bible
uses for a bond such as marriage—the cord. Cords
or ropes made for sailing ships are designed to last,
never to fray or unravel, even in the harshest storm.
Likewise, marriage is designed to endure. Remember, Jesus said: “What God has yoked together, let
no man put apart.” (Matthew 19:6) If you marry,
you need to have the same view of marriage. Does
that kind of commitment turn marriage into a burden? No.
21

A husband and wife need to maintain the right

view of each other. If each one strives to focus on
the good qualities and e?orts of the other, the mar21. A husband and wife need to maintain what attitude toward each
other, and what may help them to do so?
154

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

riage will be a source of joy and refreshment. Is it
unrealistic to have such a positive view of an imperfect mate? Jehovah is never unrealistic, yet we count
on him to maintain a positive view of us. The
psalmist asked: “If errors were what you watch,
O Jah, then who, O Jehovah, could stand?” (Psalm
130:3) Husbands and wives need to have a similarly
positive and forgiving view of each other.—Read Colossians 3:13.
22

Marriage can become a greater blessing as it en-

dures over the years. The Bible shows us the marriage of Abraham and Sarah when they were an elderly couple. Their life was by no means free of
hardships and challenges. Imagine what it was like
for Sarah, a woman possibly in her 60’s, to leave her
comfortable home in the prosperous city of Ur and
take up dwelling in tents for the rest of her life. Yet,
she submitted to her husband’s headship. A true
complement and helper to Abraham, she respectfully helped to make his decisions work. And her subjection was not super?cial. Even “to herself” she
22, 23. How did Abraham and Sarah set a good example for married
people today?
Marriage—A Gift From a Loving God

155

referred to her husband as her lord. (Genesis 18:12;
1 Peter 3:6) Her respect for Abraham came from the
heart.
Of course, that does not mean that Abraham
and Sarah always saw things the same way. She
once made a suggestion that was “very displeasing”
to Abraham. Still, at Jehovah’s direction, Abraham
humbly listened to the voice of his wife, which
turned out to be a blessing to the family. (Genesis
21:9-13) Husbands and wives today, even those married for decades, can learn much from this godly
couple.
23

In the Christian congregation, there are many
thousands of happy marriages—marriages in which
the wife deeply respects her husband, the husband
loves and honors his wife, and both work together to
put the doing of Jehovah’s will ?rst in all things. If
you decide to marry, may you choose your mate
wisely, prepare well for marriage, and work at a
peaceful, loving marriage that brings honor to Jehovah God. In that case, your marriage will certainly
help you to remain in God’s love.
24

24. What kind of marriages re?ect well on Jehovah God, and why?
156

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 11

“Let Marriage Be Honorable”
“Rejoice with the wife of your youth.”
—PROVERBS 5:18.

ARE you married? If so, is your marriage a source of
happiness, or are you experiencing serious marital
problems? Have you and your spouse drifted apart?
Are you enduring married life but not enjoying it? If
so, you likely feel sad that the warm marital bond you
once enjoyed has cooled. As a Christian, you surely
would like your marriage to bring glory to Jehovah,
the God you love. Hence, your present circumstances
may well be a source of concern and heartache to you.
Even so, please do not conclude that your situation is
hopeless.
2

Today, there are ?ne Christian couples who once

had marriages that were merely surviving, not thriving. Yet, they found a way to strengthen their relationship. You too can ?nd more contentment in your marriage. How?
1, 2. What question will we consider, and why?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

157

3

DRAWING CLO SER TO G OD
AND TO YOUR SP OUSE
You and your spouse will draw closer together if

you strive to draw closer to God. Why? Consider an
illustration: Imagine a cone-shaped mountain—wide
at the base and narrow at the top. A man is standing
at the foot of the northern slope while a woman is
standing on the other side, at the foot of the southern
slope. Both begin to climb. When both are still near
the mountain base, a long distance separates them.
Yet, as each climbs higher and higher toward the narrow summit, the distance between them becomes less
and less. Do you see the reassuring lesson in this illustration?
4

The e?ort you put forth to serve Jehovah to the

full could be compared with the e?ort it takes to
climb a mountain. Since you love Jehovah, you are already trying hard to climb, so to speak. However, if
you and your spouse have grown apart, you may be
climbing opposite sides of that mountain. What happens, though, when you continue to climb? Granted,
3, 4. Why will marriage mates draw closer together if they strive to
draw closer to God? Illustrate.
158

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

a considerable distance may separate you at ?rst.
Nevertheless, the more e?ort you put into drawing
closer to God—into climbing higher—the closer you
and your mate become. Indeed, drawing closer to God
is the key to drawing closer to your spouse. But how
can you actually do that?
One important way to climb, as it were, is for you
and your spouse to heed the counsel on marriage as
found in God’s Word. (Psalm 25:4; Isaiah 48:17, 18)
Consider, therefore, a speci?c point of counsel stated
by the apostle Paul. He said: “Let marriage be honorable among all.” (Hebrews 13:4) What does that
mean? The word “honorable” implies that something
is esteemed and precious. And that is exactly how Jehovah views marriage—he esteems it as precious.
5

YOUR MOTIVATION—HEARTFELT LOVE
FOR JEHOVAH
6 Of course, as servants of God, you and your
spouse already know that marriage is precious, even
sacred. Jehovah himself instituted the marriage
5. (a) What is one way to draw closer to Jehovah and to one’s marriage mate? (b) How does Jehovah view marriage?
6. What does the context of Paul’s counsel about marriage show, and
why is that important to keep in mind?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

159

arrangement. (Read Matthew 19:4-6.) However, if you
are currently experiencing marital problems, just
knowing that marriage is honorable may not be
enough to motivate you and your mate to treat each
other with love and respect. What, then, will move
you to do so? Note carefully how Paul addressed the
subject of showing honor. He did not say, “marriage
is honorable”; rather, he said, “let marriage be honorable.” Paul was not merely making an observation; he
was giving an exhortation.1 Keeping that distinction
in mind may help you ?nd added motivation for rekindling esteem for your spouse. Why is that the case?
Consider for a moment how you regard other
Scriptural commands, such as the commission to
make disciples or the admonition to meet together for
worship. (Matthew 28:19; Hebrews 10:24, 25) Granted, carrying out those commands may at times be a
challenge. The people to whom you preach may respond negatively, or the secular work you do may
leave you so exhausted that attending Christian meet7

1 The context shows that Paul’s admonition about marriage is
part of a series of exhortations.—Hebrews 13:1-5.

7. (a) What Scriptural commands do we carry out, and why? (b) What
good results come from obedience?
160

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ings is a struggle. Even so, you keep on preaching the
Kingdom message, and you keep on attending Christian meetings. No one can stop you—not even Satan!
Why not? Because your heartfelt love for Jehovah
moves you to obey his commandments. (1 John 5:3)
With what good results? Sharing in the preaching
work and attending meetings gives you inner peace
and heartfelt joy because you know that you are doing God’s will. And those feelings, in turn, renew your
strength. (Nehemiah 8:10) What is the lesson here?
8

Just as your deep love for God moves you to obey

the commands to preach and to meet together despite
obstacles, so your love for Jehovah can move you to
obey the Scriptural exhortation to “let [your] marriage be honorable,” even when that appears to be dif?cult. (Hebrews 13:4; Psalm 18:29; Ecclesiastes 5:4)
Additionally, just as your e?orts to share in preaching and in meeting together bring rich blessings from
God, so your e?orts to honor your marriage will be
noticed and blessed by Jehovah.—1 Thessalonians
1:3; Hebrews 6:10.
8, 9. (a) What may move us to obey the exhortation to honor marriage, and why? (b) What two points will we now consider?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

161

9

How, then, can you make your marriage honor-

able? You need to avoid behavior that will damage the
marital arrangement. In addition, you need to take
steps that will strengthen the marital bond.

10

AVOID SPEECH AND CONDUCT
THAT DISHONOR MARRIAGE
A Christian wife some time ago noted: “I pray to

Jehovah for strength to see me through.” Through
what? She explained: “My husband strikes me with
words. I may not have visible bruises, but his constant cutting remarks, such as ‘You’re a burden!’ and
‘You’re worthless!’ have scarred my heart.” This wife
brings up a matter of grave concern—abusive speech
within marriage.
11

How sad it is when spouses in Christian house-

holds hurl cruel words at each other, causing emotional wounds that are not easily healed! Obviously, a
marriage marked by hurtful speech is not honorable.
How is your marriage faring in this regard? One way
to ?nd out is by humbly asking your spouse, “What
e?ect do my words have on you?” If your mate feels
10, 11. (a) What conduct dishonors marriage? (b) What question
should we consider with our mate?
162

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

that time and again your words have caused emotional wounds, you must be willing to change the situation for the better.—Galatians 5:15; read Ephesians
4:31.
12

Keep clearly in mind that the way in which you

use your tongue within the marriage arrangement
a?ects your relationship with Jehovah. The Bible
states: “If any man thinks he is a worshipper of God
but does not keep a tight rein on his tongue, he is deceiving his own heart, and his worship is futile.”
(James 1:26) Your speech cannot be separated from
your worship. The Bible does not support the notion
that whatever happens at home is of little consequence as long as one claims to be serving God.
Please do not deceive yourself. This is a serious matter. (Read 1 Peter 3:7.) You may have abilities and zeal,
but if you willfully hurt your spouse with cutting
words, you dishonor the marriage arrangement and
your worship may be viewed by God as futile.
13

Marriage partners also need to be alert not to

12. How could one’s worship become futile in God’s eyes?
13. How could a marriage mate cause emotional pain?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

163

cause emotional pain in less direct ways. Consider
two examples: A single mother frequently phones a
married Christian man in the congregation to ask him
for advice, and they talk at length; a single Christian
brother spends considerable time each week working
together in the ?eld service with a married Christian
sister. The married individuals in those examples may
have proper intentions; yet, how does their conduct
a?ect their respective spouses? A wife facing such a
situation said: “To note that my husband gives so
much time and attention to another sister in the congregation hurts me. It makes me feel inferior.”
14

It is understandable that this spouse and others

who face a similar situation in marriage feel hurt.
Their mates ignore God’s basic instruction for marriage: “A man will leave his father and his mother and
he will stick to his wife.” (Genesis 2:24) Of course,
those who marry still respect their parents; however,
it is God’s arrangement that their foremost obligation
is to their spouse. Similarly, Christians dearly love fel14. (a) What marital obligation is highlighted at Genesis 2:24?
(b) What should we ask ourselves?
164

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

low believers; yet their primary responsibility is to
their spouse. Thus, when married Christians spend inappropriate amounts of time with or become overly
familiar with fellow believers, especially those of the
opposite sex, they put strains on the marriage bond.
Could that be a reason for tension in your marriage?
Ask yourself, ‘Do I truly give my spouse the time, attention, and a?ection that rightly belong to my mate?’
15

Moreover, married Christians who give inappro-

priate attention to those of the opposite sex who are
not their mate unwisely tread on dangerous ground.
Sad to say, some married Christians have developed
romantic feelings for those with whom they have become overly familiar. (Matthew 5:28) In turn, such
emotional bonds have led to conduct that dishonors
marriage even more. Consider what the apostle Paul
stated about this subject.

16

“LET THE MARRIAGE BED
BE WITHOUT DEFILEMENT”
Immediately after Paul gave the exhortation to

15. According to Matthew 5:28, why should married Christians avoid
giving inappropriate attention to someone of the opposite sex?
16. What command does Paul give regarding marriage?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

165

“let marriage be honorable,” he added the warning:
“Let the marriage bed be without de?lement, for God
will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.”
(Hebrews 13:4) Paul used the term “marriage bed” to
refer to sexual relations. Such relations are “without
de?lement,” or morally clean, if they are experienced
solely within the marriage arrangement. Therefore,
Christians heed the inspired words: “May you rejoice
with the wife of your youth.”—Proverbs 5:18.
17

Those having sexual relations with someone oth-

er than their spouse show gross disrespect for God’s
moral laws. True, many today view adultery as fairly
acceptable behavior. Yet, whatever other humans may
think about adultery should not in?uence how Christians regard it. They realize that in the end, not man,
but “God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.” (Hebrews 10:31; 12:29) Hence, true Christians
cling to Jehovah’s view on this subject. (Read Romans
12:9.) Recall that the patriarch Job said: “I have made
a covenant with my eyes.” (Job 31:1) Yes, to avoid
17. (a) Why is the world’s view of adultery irrelevant to Christians?
(b) How can we follow the example set by Job?
166

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

even one step on the road that could lead to adultery,
true Christians control their eyes and never look longingly at a person of the opposite sex who is not their
mate.—See the Appendix, pages 282-285.
18

In Jehovah’s eyes, how serious is adultery? The

Mosaic Law helps us to appreciate Jehovah’s feelings on the matter. In Israel, adultery and idolatry
were among the o?enses that carried the death penalty. (Leviticus 20:2, 10) Can you see a similarity between the two? Well, an Israelite worshipping an idol
broke his covenant with Jehovah. Similarly, an Israelite committing adultery broke his covenant with his
spouse. Both acted treacherously. (Exodus 19:5, 6;
Deuteronomy 5:9; read Malachi 2:14.) Hence, both
were reprehensible before Jehovah, the faithful and
trustworthy God.—Psalm 33:4.
19

Of course, Christians are not under the Mosaic

Law. Yet, recalling that in ancient Israel adultery was
viewed in a serious light may strengthen Christians
in their resolve not to commit such an act. Why?
18. (a) In Jehovah’s eyes, how serious is adultery? (b) What similarity is there between adultery and idolatry?
19. What may strengthen one’s resolve to reject adultery, and why?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

167

Consider this comparison: Would you ever enter a
church, get down on your knees, and pray in front of
an image? ‘Never!’ you will say. But would you be
tempted to do so if you were o?ered a large sum of
money? ‘Unthinkable!’ you will reply. Indeed, the very
thought of betraying Jehovah by worshipping an idol
is repulsive to a true Christian. In a similar way,
Christians should be repulsed by the thought of betraying their God, Jehovah, as well as their spouse by
committing adultery—no matter what the incentive
to sin might be. (Psalm 51:1, 4; Colossians 3:5) Never
do we want to commit an act that would cause Satan
to rejoice but would bring grave dishonor to Jehovah
and to the sacred marriage arrangement.

20

HOW TO STRENGTHEN YOUR
MARRIAGE B OND
Besides avoiding conduct that dishonors mar-

riage, what steps can you take to rekindle your respect for your marriage mate? To answer, think of the
marriage arrangement as being a house. Next, think
of the kind words, thoughtful deeds, and other expres20. What has happened in some marriages? Illustrate.
168

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

sions of honor that marriage partners extend to each
other as the decorative items that add beauty to a
house. If you feel close to each other, your marriage
resembles a house adorned with decorations that give
it color and warmth. If your a?ection diminishes,
those decorations gradually disappear, leaving your
marriage as bleak as a house without any decorations.
Since you desire to obey God’s command to “let marriage be honorable,” you would be moved to improve
the situation. After all, something precious and honorable is worth repairing, or restoring. How can you
do so? God’s Word states: “By wisdom a house is built
up, and by discernment it is made secure. By knowledge its rooms are ?lled with all sorts of precious and
pleasant treasures.” (Proverbs 24:3, 4) Consider how
these words can be applied to marriage.
21

Among the precious treasures ?lling a happy

household are such qualities as true love, godly
fear, and ?rm faith. (Proverbs 15:16, 17; 1 Peter 1:7)
They create a strong marriage. But did you note how
21. How can we gradually strengthen our marriage? (See also the box
on page 170.)
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

169

HOW CAN I IMPROVE MY MARRIAGE?
Principle: “Each one of you must love his wife as he
does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have
deep respect for her husband.”—Ephesians 5:33.
Some questions to ask yourself
? What are my mate’s good qualities, and how
can I express appreciation for him or her?—Proverbs 14:1; 31:29; 1 Peter 3:1, 6; 4:8.
? Do I honor my spouse by seeking to understand his or her thoughts and feelings?
—Philippians 2:4.
? Am I willing to overlook my spouse’s shortcomings?—Matthew 6:14, 15.
? When was the last time I expressed my a?ection for my spouse?—Song of Solomon 2:9-14.
? Toward what spiritual goals are we working?
—Matthew 6:33, 34; 1 Corinthians 9:24-27.
? What initiative can I take to encourage my
mate to read the Bible and consider the daily
text together with me?
the rooms in the above-quoted proverb are ?lled
with precious treasures? “By knowledge.” Yes, when
applied, Bible knowledge has the power to transform
170

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

people’s thinking and to move them to rekindle their
love for each other. (Romans 12:2; Philippians 1:9)
Hence, whenever you and your spouse sit down together and calmly consider a Bible passage, such as
the daily text, or a Bible-based article in The Watchtower or Awake! pertaining to marriage, it is as if you
were examining a lovely decoration that can beautify your house. When love for Jehovah moves you to
apply in your marriage the counsel that you just examined, you are, as it were, bringing that decoration
into the rooms of your house. As a result, some of
the color and warmth that you once enjoyed in your
marriage may return.
22

Granted, it may take considerable time and ef-

fort to put those decorations back in place one by
one. Yet, if you strive to do your share, you will have
the deep satisfaction of knowing that you are obeying the Bible’s command: “In showing honor to one
another, take the lead.” (Romans 12:10; Psalm 147:
11) Above all, your earnest e?orts to honor your
marriage will keep you in God’s love.
22. What satisfaction can we have if we strive to do our share in
strengthening our marriage?
“Let Marriage Be Honorable”

171

CHAPTER 12

Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”
“Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth,
but only what is good for building up.”
—EPHESIANS 4:29.

IF YOU were to give a loved one a gift, how would
you feel if he deliberately misused it? Say that you
gave him a car, and you later learned that he drove
it recklessly, causing injury to others. Would you not
be disappointed?
2

The ability to utter intelligible speech is a gift

from Jehovah, the Giver of “every good gift and
every perfect present.” (James 1:17) This gift, which
sets the human family apart from the animal creation, enables us to convey not just our thoughts but
also our feelings to others. Like a motor vehicle,
however, the gift of speech can be misused. How it
must disappoint Jehovah when speech is used recklessly, causing heartache and pain to others!
1-3. (a) What is one gift that Jehovah has given us, and how can it
be misused? (b) To remain in God’s love, how do we need to use the
gift of speech?
172

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

3

To remain in God’s love, we need to use the gift

of speech as the Giver intended. Jehovah leaves no
doubt about the kind of speech that pleases him. His
Word says: “Let a rotten word not come out of your
mouth, but only what is good for building up as the
need may be, to impart what is bene?cial to the
hearers.” (Ephesians 4:29) Let us discuss why we
need to keep on guard when it comes to speech,
what speech we should avoid, and how we can utter
speech that “is good for building up.”
4

WHY WE NEED TO GUARD OUR SPEECH
One important reason to guard our speech is that

words have power. Proverbs 15:4 says: “A calm tongue
is a tree of life, but twisted speech causes despair.”1
Even as water revives a thirsty tree, so the calm
speech of a soothing tongue can refresh the spirit of
those hearing it. In contrast, the twisted words of a
perverse tongue can crush the spirit of others. Indeed, the words we speak have the power to injure
or to heal.—Proverbs 18:21.
1 The Hebrew word rendered “twisted” at Proverbs 15:4 can also
be rendered “crooked; perverse.”

4, 5. How do some Bible proverbs describe the power of words?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

173

5

Vividly describing the power of words, another

proverb says: “Thoughtless speech is like the stabs
of a sword.” (Proverbs 12:18) Thoughtless words
said in haste can cause deep emotional wounds
and destroy relationships. Has your heart ever been
pierced by the thrusts of a verbal sword? On the positive side, the same proverb says: “The tongue of the
wise is a healing.” Thoughtful words from one who
manifests godly wisdom can mend an aching heart
and restore relationships. Can you recall an occasion when you experienced the healing power of
kind words? (Read Proverbs 16:24.) Recognizing that
spoken words have power, we certainly want to use
our speech to heal others, not to hurt them.
6

No matter how hard we try, we cannot complete-

ly control our tongue. Here, then, is a second reason why we need to keep on guard respecting our
speech: Sin and imperfection incline us toward misusing our tongue. Words are a product of our heart,
and “the inclination of the heart of man is bad.”
(Genesis 8:21; Luke 6:45) Keeping a rein on our
6. Why is it a real struggle to control our tongue?
174

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tongue is therefore a real struggle. (Read James 3:
2-4.) Although we cannot gain perfect control of our
tongue, we can keep working at making improvement in how we use it. Just as a swimmer trying to
swim upstream has to keep ?ghting the current, so
we have to keep ?ghting the sinful tendency to misuse our tongue.
7

A third reason to guard our speech is that Jeho-

vah holds us accountable for our words. The way we
use our tongue a?ects not only our relationship with
fellow humans but also our standing with Jehovah.
James 1:26 says: “If any man thinks he is a worshipper of God but does not keep a tight rein on his
tongue, he is deceiving his own heart, and his worship is futile.”1 As we saw in the preceding chapter,
our speech is not independent of our worship. If
our tongue is uncontrolled—spewing out hurtful,
poisonous speech—all of our Christian works could
be rendered worthless in God’s eyes. Is that not a
sobering thought?—James 3:8-10.
1 The Greek word translated “futile” is also rendered “useless.”
—1 Corinthians 15:17.

7, 8. To what extent does Jehovah hold us accountable for our words?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

175

8

It is clear that we have strong reasons to guard

against misusing the gift of speech. Before we consider wholesome forms of speech that build up, let
us discuss speech that certainly has no place in the
life of a true Christian.
9

SPEECH THAT TEARS D OWN
Obscene language. Cursing, profanity, and other

forms of obscene language are part of everyday
speech in today’s world. Many resort to expletives
to emphasize their speech or to compensate for an
otherwise limited vocabulary. Comedians often use
vulgar, sex-oriented speech to make people laugh.
Obscene language, however, is no laughing matter.
Some 2,000 years ago, the inspired apostle Paul
counseled the Colossian congregation to put away
“obscene talk.” (Colossians 3:8) Paul told the Ephesian congregation that “obscene jesting” is among
things that should “not even be mentioned among”
true Christians.—Ephesians 5:3, 4.
10

Obscene speech is o?ensive to Jehovah. It is also

9, 10. (a) What kind of language has become part of everyday speech
in today’s world? (b) Why do we need to reject obscene language? (See
also footnote.)
176

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

o?ensive to those who love him. Indeed, our love for
Jehovah moves us to reject obscene language. When
listing “the works of the ?esh,” Paul cites “uncleanness,” which can include impurity in speech. (Galatians 5:19-21) This is a serious matter. An individual can be disfellowshipped from the congregation if
despite repeated counsel he unrepentantly makes a
practice of using speech that refers to or promotes
what is grossly immoral, degrading, and corrupting.1
11

Harmful gossip, slander. Gossip is idle talk about

people and their lives. Is all gossip bad? Not if
we mean innocent conversation in which we might
share positive or helpful news, such as who just
got baptized or who needs a word of encouragement. First-century Christians had a keen interest in
one another’s welfare and shared appropriate information about fellow believers. (Ephesians 6:21, 22;
1 As used in the Scriptures, “uncleanness” is a broad term that
can cover a wide range of sins. Although not all uncleanness
warrants judicial action, an individual can be expelled from the
congregation if he unrepentantly practices gross uncleanness.
—2 Corinthians 12:21; Ephesians 4:19; see “Questions From Readers” in The Watchtower of July 15, 2006.

11, 12. (a) What is gossip, and how can it become harmful? (b) Why
do worshippers of Jehovah need to avoid slanderous speech?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

177

Colossians 4:8, 9) Gossip, however, can be harmful
if it distorts the facts or reveals private matters.
Even more serious, it can lead to slander, which is
always damaging. Slander is “the utterance of false
charges . . . which defame and damage another’s reputation.” The Pharisees, for example, resorted to
malicious slander in an attempt to discredit Jesus.
(Matthew 9:32-34; 12:22-24) Slander often causes
quarreling.—Proverbs 26:20.
12

Jehovah does not view lightly those who use the

gift of speech to defame others or to cause divisions.
He hates those “sowing contentions among brothers.” (Proverbs 6:16-19) The Greek word rendered
“slanderer” is di·abo·los, which is also used as a title of Satan. He is the “Devil,” the evil slanderer of
God. (Revelation 12:9, 10) Surely we want to avoid
speech that would cause us to become, in e?ect, a
devil. There is no room in the congregation for slanderous speech that stirs up such works of the ?esh
as “dissensions” and “divisions.” (Galatians 5:19-21)
Hence, before repeating some news about someone,
ask yourself: ‘Is it true? Would it be kind to repeat
178

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

this? Is it necessary or advisable to share this information?’—Read 1 Thessalonians 4:11.
13

Abusive speech. As previously noted, words have

the power to hurt. Admittedly, at times because
of human imperfection, we all say things we regret. However, the Bible warns about a pattern of
speech that has absolutely no place in a Christian home or in the congregation. Paul admonished
Christians: “Put away from yourselves every kind of
malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and
abusive speech.” (Ephesians 4:31) Other translations
render the phrase “abusive speech” as “evil words,”
“injurious language,” and “insulting language.” Abusive speech—including degrading name-calling and
harsh, relentless criticism—can strip others of their
dignity and leave them feeling worthless. The tender
and trusting hearts of children are especially vulnerable to the crushing e?ects of abusive speech.—Colossians 3:21.
13, 14. (a) What e?ect can abusive speech have on its hearers?
(b) What is reviling, and why does a reviler put himself in a dangerous position?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

179

In the strongest possible terms, the Bible condemns reviling—the practice of verbally abusing others with insulting or derogatory language. An individual who makes a practice of such speech puts
himself in a dangerous position, for a reviler can be
removed from the congregation if he fails to heed repeated e?orts to help him change. Unless he changes his ways, he could also lose out on Kingdom
blessings. (1 Corinthians 5:11-13; 6:9, 10) Clearly,
then, there is no way for us to remain in God’s love
if we make a practice of uttering speech that is unwholesome, untrue, or unkind. Such speech tears
down.
14

15

WORDS THAT ARE
“G O OD FOR BUILDING UP”
How can we use the gift of speech as the Giver

intended? Recall that God’s Word urges us to speak
“only what is good for building up.” (Ephesians 4:
29) Jehovah is pleased when we speak words that
build up, encourage, and strengthen others. It takes
thought to speak such words. The Bible does not
provide a set formula to follow; neither does it con15. What kind of speech “is good for building up”?
180

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tain a list of approved types of “wholesome speech.”
(Titus 2:8) To utter words that are “good for building up,” we do well to keep in mind three simple
but important factors that characterize upbuilding
speech: It is wholesome, it is true, and it is kind.
With such factors in mind, let us consider a few speci?c examples of speech that builds up.—See the
box “Is My Speech Upbuilding?” on page 182.
16

Sincere commendation. Both Jehovah and Jesus

recognize the need to speak words of commendation
and approval. (Matthew 3:17; 25:19-23; John 1:47) As
Christians, we too do well to o?er genuine commendation to others. Why? “A word spoken at the right
time—how good it is!” says Proverbs 15:23. Just ask
yourself: ‘How do I feel when I receive heartfelt
commendation? Does it not warm my heart and lift
my spirits?’ Indeed, a sincere word of commendation
lets you know that someone notices you, that someone cares about you, and that what you did was well
worth the e?ort involved. Such reassurance builds
16, 17. (a) Why should we commend others? (b) What opportunities
are there to commend others in the congregation? in the family?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

181

IS MY SPEECH UPBUILDING?
Principle: “Let your words always be
gracious.”—Colossians 4:6.
Some questions to ask yourself
? When was the last time I o?ered someone
speci?c commendation?—1 Corinthians 11:2;
Revelation 2:1-3.
? Do I express my respect for others by
saying please and thank you?—Genesis 13:14;
John 11:41.
? In conversation, do I speak mainly about myself, or am I also interested in the thoughts and
feelings of others?—Philippians 2:3, 4;
James 1:19.
? Do I use what I know about others as a means
to build them up or to tear them down?
—Proverbs 15:1, 2.
? How do I feel about the use of profanity, and
what does my view reveal about what is in my
heart?—Luke 6:45; James 3:10, 11.
your con?dence and motivates you to work even
more diligently in the future. Since you appreciate it
when you receive commendation, should you not, in
turn, do your best to give commendation to others?
—Read Matthew 7:12.
182

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Train yourself to look for the good in others,
and then give voice to the positive. In the congrega17

tion, you may hear a well-developed talk at a meeting, notice a young one who is reaching out for spiritual goals, or observe an older one who is faithful
in attending meetings despite the limitations of advancing years. A sincere word of commendation may
touch the hearts of such ones and strengthen them
spiritually. In the family, husbands and wives need
to hear words of warm commendation and appreciation from each other. (Proverbs 31:10, 28) Especially do children thrive on feeling noticed and appreciated. Commendation and approval are to a child
what sunshine and water are to a plant. Parents,
look for opportunities to commend your children
for their praiseworthy qualities and e?orts. Such
commendation can build courage and con?dence in
your children and motivate them to try even harder
to do what is right.
Encouragement and consolation. Jehovah deeply cares about “the lowly” and “those being
18

18, 19. Why should we do our best to encourage and console fellow
believers, and how can we do so?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

183

crushed.” (Isaiah 57:15) His Word urges us to “keep
encouraging one another” and to “speak consolingly to those who are depressed.” (1 Thessalonians 5:
11, 14) We can be sure that God notices and appreciates our e?orts to encourage and console fellow
believers whose hearts are weighed down with sadness.
19

What, though, can you say to build up a fellow

Christian who is discouraged or depressed? Do not
feel that you must ?x the problem. In many cases,
simple words are often the most helpful. Assure the
downhearted person of your care and concern. O?er
to pray aloud with the discouraged one; you can beseech Jehovah to help that one to know how much
he or she is loved by others and by God. (James 5:
14, 15) Reassure him that he is needed and valued
as a member of the congregation. (1 Corinthians
12:12-26) Read an encouraging Bible verse to assure
him that Jehovah truly cares about him as an individual. (Psalm 34:18; Matthew 10:29-31) Taking ample time to share “a good word” with the despondent one and speaking from your heart will no doubt
184

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

help him to feel loved and appreciated.—Read Proverbs 12:25.
20

E?ective counsel. As imperfect creatures, we all

need to receive counsel from time to time. The Bible encourages us: “Listen to counsel and accept discipline, in order to become wise in your future.”
(Proverbs 19:20) Giving counsel to others is not limited to the elders. Parents counsel children. (Ephesians 6:4) Mature sisters may need to o?er counsel
to younger women. (Titus 2:3-5) Love for others
moves us to want to give counsel that the recipient
can accept without feeling crushed. What can help
us to give such counsel? Consider three factors that
make counsel more e?ective: the attitude and motive of the counselor, the basis for the counsel, and
the manner in which it is given.
21

E?ective counsel starts with the counselor. Ask

yourself, ‘When is counsel easy for me to accept?’
When you know that the one counseling you cares
about you, is not speaking out of personal frustration, and has no ulterior motives, the counsel is
20, 21. What factors make counsel e?ective?
Speak What “Is Good for Building Up”

185

easier to accept. So when you counsel others, should
not the same things be true of your attitude and motive? Successful counsel is also based on God’s
Word. (2 Timothy 3:16) Whether directly quoting
from the Bible or not, we should have a Scriptural
basis for any counsel we give. Thus, elders are careful not to impose their own views on others; neither
do they bend or twist the Scriptures, making it seem
that the Bible supports some personal view. Counsel
is also more e?ective if it is delivered in the right
manner. Counsel that is salted with kindness is easier to accept and lets the one receiving it keep his
dignity.—Colossians 4:6.
To be sure, speech is a precious gift from God.
Our love for Jehovah should move us to use, not
misuse, this gift. Let us remember that the words we
22

speak to others have power—the power to build up
or to tear down. Let us, then, strive to use this gift as
the Giver intended—“for building up.” Our speech
will thus be a blessing to those around us and will
help us to remain in God’s love.
22. What is your determination regarding the use of the gift of
speech?
186

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 13

Celebrations That Displease God
“Keep on making sure of what is acceptable
to the Lord.” —EPHESIANS 5:10.
“THE true worshippers,” said Jesus, “will worship
the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him.”
(John 4:23) When Jehovah ?nds such individuals—as
he found you—he draws them to himself and to his
Son. (John 6:44) What an honor that is! Lovers of
Bible truth, however, must “keep on making sure of
what is acceptable to the Lord,” for Satan is a master of deception.—Ephesians 5:10; Revelation 12:9.
2

Consider what occurred near Mount Sinai when

the Israelites asked Aaron to make them a god. Aaron acquiesced and made a golden calf but implied
that it represented Jehovah. “There is a festival to
Jehovah tomorrow,” he said. Was Jehovah indi?erent
1. What kind of people does Jehovah draw to himself, and why must
they remain spiritually vigilant?
2. Explain how Jehovah views those who try to fuse true religion with
false.
Celebrations That Displease God

187

to this fusion of true religion with false? No. He had
about 3,000 idolaters put to death. (Exodus 32:1-6,
10, 28) The lesson? If we want to keep ourselves in
God’s love, we must “touch nothing unclean” and
jealously guard the truth against any form of corruption.—Isaiah 52:11; Ezekiel 44:23; Galatians 5:9.
3

Sadly, after the death of the apostles, who acted

as a restraint against apostasy, so-called Christians
who had no love of truth began to adopt pagan
customs, celebrations, and “holy” days, which they
dubbed Christian. (2 Thessalonians 2:7, 10) As you
consider some of these celebrations, note how they
re?ect, not the spirit of God, but that of the world.
Generally speaking, worldly celebrations have a common theme: They appeal to ?eshly desires, and they
promote false religious beliefs and spiritism—the
hallmarks of “Babylon the Great.”1 (Revelation 18:
2-4, 23) Keep in mind, too, that Jehovah observed
1 See the box “Should I Join in the Celebration?” on pages 192193. A number of speci?c “holy” days and celebrations are listed
in the Watch Tower Publications Index, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

3, 4. Why should we pay close attention to Bible principles when examining popular customs and celebrations?
188

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

?rsthand the disgusting pagan religious practices
from which many popular customs originated. No
doubt he ?nds such celebrations just as o?ensive today. Should not his view be what matters most to us?
—2 John 6, 7.
As true Christians, we know that certain celebrations are not pleasing to Jehovah. But we need to be
?rmly determined in our heart to have absolutely
nothing to do with them. A review of why Jehovah
is displeased with such celebrations will strengthen
our resolve to avoid anything that might hinder us
from remaining in God’s love.
4

CHRISTMAS—SUN WORSHIP RENAMED
5 The Bible makes no mention of a birthday celebration for Jesus. In fact, his exact birth date is unknown. We can be sure, though, that he was not
born on December 25 in the cold of winter in that
part of the world.1 For one thing, Luke recorded that
when Jesus was born, “shepherds [were] living out of
1 Based on Biblical reckoning and secular history, Jesus was
likely born in 2 B.C.E. in the Jewish month of Ethanim, which
corresponds to September/October on our present calendar.—See
Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 2, pages 56-57, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

5. Why can we be certain that Jesus was not born on December 25?
Celebrations That Displease God

189

doors” minding their ?ocks. (Luke 2:8-11) If “living
out of doors” had been their habit year round, that
would not have been noteworthy. However, because
Bethlehem is subject to cold rains and snow, ?ocks
were wintered under cover and shepherds would not
have been “living out of doors.” Additionally, Joseph
and Mary went to Bethlehem because Caesar Augustus had ordered a census. (Luke 2:1-7) It is highly
unlikely that Caesar would have commanded a people who were resentful of Roman rule to travel to
their ancestral cities in the dead of winter.
The roots of Christmas are found, not in Scripture, but in ancient pagan festivals, such as the Roman Saturnalia, a celebration dedicated to Saturn,
the god of agriculture. Likewise, according to their
reckoning, devotees of the god Mithra celebrated
December 25 as the “birthday of the invincible sun,”
says the New Catholic Encyclopedia. “Christmas originated at a time when the cult of the sun was particularly strong at Rome,” about three centuries after
the death of Christ.
6

6, 7. (a) The roots of many Christmas customs can be found where?
(b) What contrast can be seen between Christmas giving and Christian
giving?
190

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

7

During their celebrations, pagans exchanged gifts

and feasted—practices that Christmas preserved. As
is also true today, however, much Christmas giving
was not in the spirit of 2 Corinthians 9:7, which
reads: “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his
heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God
loves a cheerful giver.” True Christians give out of
love, their giving is not tied to a date, and they expect no gifts in return. (Luke 14:12-14; read Acts 20:
35.) Moreover, they deeply appreciate being set free
from the Christmas frenzy and relieved of the heavy
yoke of ?nancial debt that many incur at that time
of year.—Matthew 11:28-30; John 8:32.
8

But, some may argue, did not the astrologers pre-

sent birthday gifts to Jesus? No. Their gift-giving was
simply a way of paying their respects to a person of
note, a common custom in Bible times. (1 Kings 10:
1, 2, 10, 13; Matthew 2:2, 11) In fact, they did not
even come on the night that Jesus was born. Jesus
was, not a babe in a manger, but many months old
and living in a house when they arrived.
8. Did the astrologers present birthday gifts to Jesus? Explain.
Celebrations That Displease God

191

SHOULD I JOIN
IN THE CELEBRATION?
Principle: “ ‘Get out from among them,
and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit
touching the unclean thing’ ”; “ ‘and I will take
you in.’ ”—2 Corinthians 6:17.
Some questions to ask yourself about a popular celebration or custom
? Does it clearly have roots in a false religious
practice or teaching, including spiritism?—Isaiah
52:11; 1 Corinthians 4:6; 2 Corinthians 6:14-18;
Revelation 18:4.
? Does it give undue honor or adulation to a
human, an organization, or a national symbol?
—Jeremiah 17:5-7; Acts 10:25, 26; 1 John 5:21.
? Does it elevate one nation or ethnic group over
another?—Acts 10:34, 35; 17:26.
? Does it re?ect “the spirit of the world,” which
works in opposition to God’s holy spirit?
—1 Corinthians 2:12; Ephesians 2:2.
? Could my participation in it be a cause for
stumbling?—Romans 14:21.
? If I choose not to participate, how would I
respectfully explain my reasons to others?
—Romans 12:1, 2; Colossians 4:6.
192

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

The following scriptures may shed further light on questions about popular observances:
? “[Unfaithful Israelites] mingled with the
nations and adopted their ways.”
—Psalm 106:35.
? “The person faithful in what is least is faithful
also in much, and the person unrighteous in
what is least is unrighteous also in much.”
—Luke 16:10.
? “You are no part of the world.”—John 15:19.
? “You cannot be partaking of ‘the table of
Jehovah’ and the table of demons.”
—1 Corinthians 10:21.
? “The time that has passed by is su?cient for
you to have done the will of the nations when
you carried on in acts of brazen conduct, unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties, drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries.”—1 Peter 4:3.
BIBLICAL LIGHT ON BIRTHDAYS
9 Even though the birth of a baby has always been
a cause for much joy, the Bible makes no reference
to a birthday celebration for a servant of God.
9. What is signi?cant about birthday celebrations mentioned in the Bible?
Celebrations That Displease God

193

(Psalm 127:3) Was this simply an oversight? No, for
two birthday celebrations are mentioned—that of a
Pharaoh of Egypt and that of Herod Antipas. (Read
Genesis 40:20-22; Mark 6:21-29.) Both events, however, are presented in a bad light—especially the latter, which saw John the Baptizer beheaded.
10

“The early Christians,” notes The World Book En-

10, 11. How did the early Christians view birthday celebrations, and
why?

“HOLY” DAYS AND SATANISM
It is of interest to note that the most important
day in the religion called Satanism is one’s birthday. Why? Because Satanists hold that each individual is a god if he chooses to view himself as
one. Thus, to celebrate one’s own birthday is to
celebrate the birth of a god. Of course, most people do not take such an extreme, egotistical view.
Nevertheless, the book The Lore of Birthdays
states: “Other holidays lift the heart, but birthdays warm the ego.”
The next most “holy” days on the Satanists’
calendar are Walpurgis Night and Halloween.
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary de?nes the
former as “the eve of May Day on which witches
are held to ride to an appointed rendezvous.”
194

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

cyclopedia, “considered the celebration of anyone’s
birth to be a pagan custom.” The ancient Greeks, for
instance, believed that each person had a protective
spirit that attended the person’s birth and thereafter
watched over him. That spirit “had a mystic relation
with the god on whose birthday the individual was
born,” says the book The Lore of Birthdays. Birthdays
also have a long-standing and an intimate link with
astrology and the horoscope.
11

Besides rejecting birthday customs on account of

pagan and spiritistic roots, God’s servants of old
likely rejected them on principle as well. Why? These
were humble, modest men and women who did not
view their arrival in the world as so important that
it should be celebrated.1 (Micah 6:8; Luke 9:48)
Rather, they glori?ed Jehovah and thanked him for
the precious gift of life.2—Psalm 8:3, 4; 36:9; Revelation 4:11.
1 See the box “ ‘Holy’ Days and Satanism,” on page 194.
2 The Law covenant required that a woman, after giving birth,
present a sin o?ering to God. (Leviticus 12:1-8) A poignant reminder that humans pass sin on to their children, this legal requirement
helped the Israelites to have a balanced view of the birth of a child
and may have discouraged them from adopting pagan birthday customs.—Psalm 51:5.
Celebrations That Displease God

195

12

At death, all integrity keepers are safe in God’s

memory, and their future life is guaranteed. (Job 14:
14, 15) Says Ecclesiastes 7:1: “A good name is better
than good oil, and the day of death is better than the
day of birth.” Our “good name” is the good reputation we have gained with God through faithful service. Signi?cantly, the only commemoration commanded for Christians involves, not a birth, but a
death—that of Jesus, whose excellent “name” is the
key to our salvation.—Hebrews 1:3, 4; Luke 22:17-20.

13

EASTER—FERTILITY WORSHIP
IN DIS GUISE
Promoted as a celebration of Christ’s resurrec-

tion, Easter is actually rooted in false religion. The
name Easter itself has been linked to Eostre, or Ostara, the Anglo-Saxon goddess of the dawn and of
spring. And how did eggs and rabbits come to be associated with Easter? Eggs “have been prominent as
symbols of new life and resurrection,” says the Encyclopædia Britannica, while the hare and the rabbit
have long served as symbols of fertility. Easter,
12. How can the day of our death be better than the day of our birth?
13, 14. What are the roots of popular Easter customs?
196

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

therefore, is really a fertility rite thinly disguised as
a celebration of Christ’s resurrection.1
Would Jehovah condone the use of a ?lthy fertility rite to commemorate his Son’s resurrection?
Never! (2 Corinthians 6:17, 18) In fact, the Scriptures neither command nor authorize the commemorating of Jesus’ resurrection in the ?rst place. To
do so in the name of Easter, therefore, is to be doubly disloyal.
14

HALLOWEEN IS FAR FROM HOLY
15 Known for its witches, goblins, and other grotesque decorations and paraphernalia, Halloween
—also called All Hallows’ Eve or the eve of All
Saints’ Day—can be traced back to the ancient Celts
of Britain and Ireland. On the full moon nearest November 1, they celebrated the festival of Samhain,
meaning “Summer’s End.” They believed that during
Samhain, the veil between the human and the supernatural worlds was parted and that spirits, both good
1 Eostre (or Eastre) was also a fertility goddess. According to
The Dictionary of Mythology, “she owned a hare in the moon which
loved eggs and she was sometimes depicted as having the head of
a hare.”

15. What is the origin of Halloween, and what may be signi?cant
about the date chosen to celebrate this holiday?
Celebrations That Displease God

197

and evil, roamed the earth. The souls of the dead
were thought to return to their homes, and families
would put out food and drink for their ghostly visitors in hopes of appeasing them. Thus, when children today, dressed as ghosts or witches, go from
house to house threatening a mischievous trick unless they receive a treat, they unwittingly perpetuate
the rituals of Samhain.
KEEP YOUR WEDDING UNDEFILED
16 Soon, “no voice of a bridegroom and of a bride
will ever be heard in [Babylon the Great] again.”
(Revelation 18:23) Why? In part because of her spiritistic practices, which can de?le a marriage right
from the wedding day.—Mark 10:6-9.
Customs vary from country to country. Some
customs that may appear innocent may have their
roots in Babylonish practices that are supposed to
bring ‘good luck’ to the bridal couple or their guests.
(Isaiah 65:11) One such tradition involves the throwing of rice or its substitutes. This practice may have
17

16, 17. (a) Why should Christian couples planning to get married examine local wedding customs in the light of Bible principles? (b) In
regard to such customs as throwing rice or its substitutes, what should
Christians take into consideration?
198

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

had its roots in the notion that food appeased evil
spirits and kept them from doing injury to the bride
and groom. Additionally, rice has a long mystical
association with fertility, happiness, and longevity.
Clearly, all who want to remain in God’s love will
shun such tainted customs.—Read 2 Corinthians 6:
14-18.
Servants of Jehovah likewise refrain from worldly practices that may rob weddings and wedding receptions of Christian dignity or that may o?end the
conscience of some. For example, they avoid giving
speeches tainted with hurtful sarcasm or sexual innuendos and refrain from practical jokes or remarks
that can embarrass the newlyweds and others. (Proverbs 26:18, 19; Luke 6:31; 10:27) They also avoid lavish fairy-tale receptions that re?ect, not modesty, but
“the showy display of one’s means of life.” (1 John 2:
16) If you are planning a wedding, never forget that
Jehovah wants your special day to be something you
can always look back on with joy, not regret.1
18

1 See the three articles on weddings and social gatherings in The
Watchtower, October 15, 2006, pages 18-31.

18. What Bible principles should guide both the couple planning a wedding and those invited to attend?
Celebrations That Displease God

199

TOASTING
—A RELIGIOUS GESTURE?
19 A common practice at weddings and on other social occasions is toasting. The 1995 International
Handbook on Alcohol and Culture says: “Toasting . . .
is probably a secular vestige of ancient sacri?cial libations in which a sacred liquid was o?ered to the
gods . . . in exchange for a wish, a prayer summarized in the words ‘long life!’ or ‘to your health!’ ”
True, many people may not consciously view toasting as a religious or superstitious gesture. Still, the custom of lifting wine glasses heavenward might be viewed
as a request to “heaven”—a superhuman force—for a
blessing in a way that does not accord with that outlined in the Scriptures.—John 14:6; 16:23.1
20

“YOU WHO LOVE JEHOVAH,
HATE WHAT IS BAD”
21 Re?ecting the plummeting standards of today’s
world—a trend promoted either directly or indirectly by Babylon the Great—some countries sponsor
1 See The Watchtower, February 15, 2007, pages 30-31.

19, 20. What does one secular source say about the origin of toasting, and why is this custom unacceptable to Christians?
21. Even though they may not have a religious theme, what popular
celebrations would Christians avoid, and why?
200

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

annual carnivals or Mardi Gras, festivals that feature lewd dancing and that may even celebrate gay
and lesbian lifestyles. Would it be appropriate for
those who love Jehovah to attend or view such an
event? Would their doing so re?ect a genuine hatred
for what is bad? (Psalm 1:1, 2; 97:10) How much
better to imitate the attitude of the psalmist who
prayed: “Turn my eyes away from looking at what is
worthless”!—Psalm 119:37.
22

On the days of worldly celebrations, a Christian

would be careful that his conduct not give others the
impression that he is joining in the celebration.
“Whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else,” wrote Paul, “do all things for God’s glory.” (1 Corinthians 10:31; see the box “Making Wise
Decisions,” on pages 205-207.) On the other hand, if
a custom or a celebration clearly retains no false religious signi?cance, is not part of a political or patriotic observance, and violates no Bible principles,
then each Christian might make a personal decision
as to whether he will share in it. At the same time,
22. When might a Christian decide according to his own conscience
whether he will share in a celebration or not?
Celebrations That Displease God

201

TRUE WORSHIP BRINGS
THE GREATEST JOY
Jehovah is “the happy God,” and he wants his
servants to be happy. (1 Timothy 1:11) This fact
is re?ected in the following scriptures:
“The one with a cheerful heart has a continual
feast.”—Proverbs 15:15.
“I have concluded that there is nothing better
for them than to rejoice and to do good during
their life, also that everyone should eat and drink
and ?nd enjoyment for all his hard work. It is the
gift of God.”—Ecclesiastes 3:12, 13.
“The generous one has generous intentions.
And in generous endeavors he perseveres.”—Isaiah 32:8.
“Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I [Jesus] will refresh you. For my
yoke is kindly, and my load is light.”—Matthew
11:28, 30.
“You will know the truth, and the truth will set
you free.”—John 8:32.
“Let each one [give] just as he has resolved in
his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion,
for God loves a cheerful giver.”—2 Corinthians
9:7.
202

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

“The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
. . . kindness, goodness.”—Galatians 5:22.
“The fruitage of the light consists of every
sort of goodness and righteousness and truth.”
—Ephesians 5:9.
he would consider the feelings of others so as not to
become a cause for stumbling.
GLORIFY G OD IN WORD AND DEED
23 Many people view the days of certain popular
celebrations primarily as opportunities for family
and friends to get together. Thus, if someone wrongly assumes that our Scriptural stand is unloving or
extreme, we can kindly explain that Jehovah’s Witnesses value wholesome gatherings of family and
friends. (Proverbs 11:25; Ecclesiastes 3:12, 13; 2 Corinthians 9:7) We enjoy fellowship with loved ones
throughout the year, but because of our love for God
and for his righteous standards, we do not want to
tarnish such happy occasions with customs that offend him.—See the box “True Worship Brings the
Greatest Joy,” on pages 202-203.
23, 24. How might we give a good witness concerning Jehovah’s righteous standards?
Celebrations That Displease God

203

Some Witnesses have had good success in sharing with sincere inquirers points from chapter 16 of
the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?1 Remember, though, that our goal is to win hearts, not arguments. So be respectful, maintain a mild temper, and
“let your words always be gracious, seasoned with
salt.”—Colossians 4:6.
25 As Jehovah’s servants, we are well-informed. We
know why we believe and practice certain things
and abstain from others. (Hebrews 5:14) So parents,
teach your children to reason on Bible principles. By
doing so, you build up their faith, you help them to
give Scriptural answers to those who question their
beliefs, and you assure them of Jehovah’s love.—Isaiah 48:17, 18; 1 Peter 3:15.
26 All who worship God “with spirit and truth” not
only avoid unscriptural celebrations but also strive
to be honest in every aspect of life. (John 4:23) Today, many view honesty as impractical. But as we
shall see in the next chapter, God’s ways are always
the best.
24

1 Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

25, 26. How can parents help their children to grow in faith and love
for Jehovah?
204

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

MAKING WISE DECISIONS
At times, situations may arise that test our
love for Jehovah and our grasp of Bible principles. For example, a Christian may be invited
by an unbelieving marriage mate to have a
meal with relatives on a worldly holiday. Some
Christians may in good conscience accept; others may not. If a Christian does accept such an
o?er, his conduct should make it plain that he
is not celebrating the holiday and that his visit
is purely to enjoy a meal with relatives.
It would be prudent for a Christian to speak
respectfully to his marriage mate in advance,
explaining the embarrassment that might occur
if the relatives share in holiday activities and
the Witness declines. The unbelieving mate
might decide to visit on another day.—1 Peter
3:15.
After hearing his wife’s explanation, what if
the husband of a Christian woman still insists
that she accompany him? She might conclude
that as head of the household, he has the responsibility to provide food for the family. (Colossians 3:18) In this case, the meal is at the
home of his relatives. She may even be able to
give a ?ne witness on that occasion. The food
Celebrations That Displease God

205

is not contaminated just because it is eaten on a
worldly holiday. (1 Corinthians 8:8) The Christian might view it as a common meal and not
join in any holiday greetings, songs, toasts, and
so forth.
Another factor to be considered is the e?ect
that sharing in such a meal might have on others. A Christian wife should take into account
the possibility that others who learn of her visit with worldly relatives on that day might be
stumbled.—1 Corinthians 8:9; 10:23, 24.
In addition, will the family pressure the
Christian wife to compromise? The desire to
avoid any embarrassment can exert a powerful
in?uence! So it would be important to think the
matter through in advance, taking all these factors into consideration, including, of course,
her own Christian conscience.—Acts 24:16.
Should I Accept a Christmas B onus?
During the Christmas season, a Christian’s
employer may o?er a present or a bonus.
Should the Christian reject such? Not necessarily. The employer may not even be thinking
that by accepting the bonus the receiver is celebrating Christmas. The employer may simply
be giving all his workers a share of the company’s pro?ts. Or the bonus may be evidence
206

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

of his gratitude for services rendered all year
long as well as a stimulus to continued good
work. The employer may give a gift to all employees—Jews, Muslims, or others—regardless
of whether they celebrate Christmas or not. So
the mere timing of the gift or the name that
may be associated with it does not necessarily
rule out its acceptance by one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Even if the gift is given because of a religious
holiday, that does not mean that the recipient
is thought to share the religious view. A fellow
worker or a relative may tell a Witness, “I know
that you do not celebrate this holiday, but I still
want you to have this as a gift from me.” If the
Christian’s conscience would be at rest, he
might choose to accept the gift and express
thanks without any reference to the holiday.
(Acts 23:1) Perhaps at a time when there will
be less likelihood of causing o?ense, the Christian can tactfully explain his stand.
However, what if the one o?ering the gift has
the clear intention of showing that the Christian is not ?rm in his beliefs or will compromise for material gain? Then it is de?nitely best
to decline. To be sure, we want to render Jehovah God exclusive devotion.—Matthew 4:8-10.
Celebrations That Displease God

207

CHAPTER 14

Be Honest in All Things
“We wish to conduct ourselves honestly
in all things.”— HEBREWS 13:18.
A MOTHER and her little boy leave a store together.
Suddenly, the child stops, a look of shock on his face. In
his hand he is holding a small toy that he picked up in
the store. He forgot to put it back or to ask his mother
if she would buy it. He cries out to her, distressed. She
reassures him and takes him back into the store so that
he can return the item and apologize. As he does so, the
mother’s heart swells with joy and pride. Why?
Few things delight parents more than seeing that
their children are learning the importance of honesty.
And so it is with our heavenly Father, “the God of
truth.” (Psalm 31:5) As he watches us grow to spiritual
maturity, he is pleased to see us striving to be honest.
Because we want to please him and remain in his love,
we echo the sentiments expressed by the apostle Paul:
“We wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”
2

1, 2. Why is Jehovah pleased when he sees our e?orts to be honest?
Illustrate.
208

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

(Hebrews 13:18) Let us focus on four main areas of life
in which we may at times ?nd it a special challenge to
be honest. Then we will consider some of the blessings
that come as a result.

HONESTY WITH OURSELVES
3 Our ?rst challenge is to learn to be honest with ourselves. It is very easy for us as imperfect humans to succumb to self-deception. For instance, Jesus told the
Christians in Laodicea that they had fooled themselves
into thinking that they were rich when, in fact, they were
“poor and blind and naked” spiritually—a truly pitiable
state. (Revelation 3:17) Their self-deception only made
their situation more dangerous.
4 You may recall, too, that the disciple James warned:
“If any man thinks he is a worshipper of God but does
not keep a tight rein on his tongue, he is deceiving his
own heart, and his worship is futile.” (James 1:26) If we
were to reason that we could misuse our tongue and still
worship Jehovah acceptably, we would succeed only in
deceiving our own heart. Our worship of Jehovah would
be futile, an utter waste. What can keep us from such a
sad course?
3-5. (a) How does God’s Word warn us about the dangers of selfdeception? (b) What will help us to be honest with ourselves?
Be Honest in All Things

209

In that same passage, James likens the truth of God’s
word to a mirror. He advises us to peer into God’s perfect law and make adjustments accordingly. (Read James
1:23-25.) The Bible can help us to be honest with ourselves and to see what we need to do to improve. (Lamentations 3:40; Haggai 1:5) We may also pray to Jehovah
and ask him to examine us, helping us to see and to address any serious ?aws. (Psalm 139:23, 24) Dishonesty
is an insidious weakness, and we need to view it as our
heavenly Father does. Proverbs 3:32 says: “Jehovah detests a devious person, but His close friendship is with
the upright.” Jehovah can help us to feel as he does and
to see ourselves as he sees us. Remember that Paul said:
“We wish to conduct ourselves honestly.” We cannot be
perfect now, but we sincerely desire and earnestly seek
to be honest.
5

HONESTY IN THE FAMILY
6 Honesty should be a hallmark of the Christian family. Husband and wife, then, must be open and honest
with each other. There is no room in a Christian marriage for such hurtful, unclean practices as ?irting with
those outside the marriage, cultivating clandestine rela6. Why do marriage mates need to be honest with each other, and what
dangers do they thus avoid?
210

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tionships via the Internet, or using pornography in any
form. Some married Christians have taken up such
wrong conduct while concealing it from an innocent
mate. Doing so is dishonest. Notice the words of faithful King David: “I do not associate with deceitful men,
and I avoid those who hide what they are.” (Psalm 26:4)
If you are married, never engage in conduct that might
tempt you to hide what you are from your mate!
7

In teaching their children the value of honesty, par-

ents are wise to make use of Bible examples. On the negative side, there are such accounts as that of Achan, who
stole and attempted to cover his theft; Gehazi, who lied
for the sake of ?nancial gain; and Judas, who stole and
lied spitefully to harm Jesus.—Joshua 6:17-19; 7:11-25;
2 Kings 5:14-16, 20-27; Matthew 26:14, 15; John 12:6.
8

On the positive side, there are such accounts as that

of Jacob, who urged his sons to return money they found
in their bags because he felt that it might have been put
there by mistake; that of Jephthah and his daughter,
who honored her father’s vow at great personal sacri?ce; and that of Jesus, who bravely identi?ed himself
7, 8. What Bible examples can help children to learn the value of honesty?
Be Honest in All Things

211

SATANIC LIES REGARDING SERIOUS SINS
When it comes to serious sins, there are some
dangerous lies that Satan would love for you to
believe. Happily, Christians are not ignorant of
the Devil’s “crafty acts.” (Ephesians 6:11) Consider three of such lies.
“Sins can be hidden.” In truth, Jehovah sees everything that we do. “All things are naked and openly
exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must
give an account.” (Hebrews 4:13) Since Jehovah
knows the facts and since we must give an account to him, why add to our guilt by attempting
to hide a serious sin from his human servants?
—See also 2 Samuel 12:12.
“The elders cannot be trusted, so don’t tell them anything.” Wicked King Ahab addressed Elijah this
way: “O my enemy!” (1 Kings 21:20) As Jehovah’s
prophet in Israel, Elijah could have helped Ahab
gain forgiveness. In the Christian congregation,
Jesus provides the elders as “gifts in men.” (Ephesians 4:8) Though imperfect, the elders are “keeping watch over” us, that is, looking out for our
spiritual health and welfare. (Hebrews 13:17)
They are not the enemy; they are Jehovah’s means
of helping us.
“You protect a friend by helping him to conceal his
sins.” The truth is, we would do a sinner great
harm by helping to conceal his sins. Serious sins
212

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

are signs of real spiritual illness; concealing them
is like hiding serious symptoms from a quali?ed
doctor. (James 5:14, 15) The sinner may fear the
possibility of discipline; but discipline is an expression of Jehovah’s love, and it may well save
the sinner’s life. (Proverbs 3:12; 4:13) Furthermore, the persistent sinner likely presents a real
danger to others in the congregation. Would you
want to assist in the spread of his wrong attitudes
that led him into sin? (Leviticus 5:1; 1 Timothy 5:
22) By all means, then, make sure that the erring
one brings the matter to the attention of the congregation elders.
before a vicious mob in order to ful?ll prophecy and protect his friends. (Genesis 43:12; Judges 11:30-40; John 18:
3-11) This partial list may give parents a taste of the riches found in God’s Word that can help them teach their
children to love and value honesty.
Such teaching places an important obligation on
parents. The apostle Paul asked: “Do you, however,
the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself?
You, the one preaching, ‘Do not steal,’ do you steal?”
(Romans 2:21) Some parents confuse their children
9

9. What should parents avoid if they want to set an example of honesty for their children, and why is such an example important?
Be Honest in All Things

213

by teaching about honesty while acting dishonestly
themselves. They may justify petty theft and deceptive
words with such excuses as “Oh, they expect people to
take these things” or “That was just a little white lie, a
?b.” In reality, stealing is stealing, regardless of the value of the item stolen, and lying is lying, regardless of the
subject matter or the scope of the untruth.1 (Read Luke
16:10.) Children are quick to detect hypocrisy and may
be seriously damaged by it. (Ephesians 6:4) However,
when they learn honesty from their parents’ examples,
they may well grow up to glorify Jehovah in this dishonest world.—Proverbs 22:6.

HONESTY IN THE CONGREGATION
10 Associating with fellow Christians a?ords us many
opportunities to develop honesty. As we learned in
Chapter 12, we need to be careful in the way we use the
gift of speech, particularly among our spiritual brothers
and sisters. Casual talk can so easily turn into harmful
gossip, even slander! If we repeat a story of uncertain or1 In the congregation setting, a practice of ?agrant, malicious
lying—clearly intended to hurt others—may warrant judicial action
on the part of the elders.

10. Regarding honest communication among fellow believers, what
cautions do we need to keep in mind?
214

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

igin, we may be helping to spread a lie, so it is much better to control our lips. (Proverbs 10:19) On the other
hand, we may know something to be true, but that does
not mean that it is worth saying. For example, the matter may be none of our business, or it may be unkind to
speak about it. (1 Thessalonians 4:11) Some people excuse rudeness by calling it honesty, but our words
should always be gracious and kind.—Read Colossians
4:6.
It is particularly important that we be honest with
those taking the lead in the congregation. Some who become involved in serious wrongdoing compound the
problem by trying to cover up their sin and lying to
congregation elders when asked about it. Such ones even
begin to lead a double life, pretending to serve Jehovah
while pursuing a course of serious sin. In e?ect, such a
course turns a person’s whole life into a lie. (Psalm 12:2)
Others tell the elders part of the truth while concealing essential facts. (Acts 5:1-11) Such dishonesty often
stems from believing in lies that Satan promotes.—See
11

11, 12. (a) In what ways do some who become involved in serious
wrongdoing compound the problem? (b) What are some lies that Satan
promotes regarding serious sins, and how may we combat them?
(c) How can we show ourselves honest with Jehovah’s organization?
Be Honest in All Things

215

the box “Satanic Lies Regarding Serious Sins,” on pages 212-213.
12 It is also important to be honest with Jehovah’s organization when we answer questions in writing. For example, when we report our activity in the ministry, we
are careful not to falsify the facts. Similarly, when we ?ll
out an application for some privilege of service, we
should never misrepresent the real state of our health
or any other aspect of our record.—Read Proverbs 6:
16-19.
13 Our honesty with fellow believers also extends to
matters of business. At times, Christian brothers and
sisters may engage in business dealings together. They
should be careful to keep such matters separate from
the worship they carry out together at the Kingdom Hall
or in the ministry. The business relationship may be that
of an employer and an employee. If we employ brothers
or sisters, we would be careful to treat them honestly,
paying them in a timely way, in the amount agreed upon,
and with the bene?ts arranged for or required by law.
(1 Timothy 5:18; James 5:1-4) Conversely, if we are employed by a brother or a sister, we give the full amount
13. How can we maintain honesty if we have a business relationship
with a fellow believer?
216

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

of work for our wages. (2 Thessalonians 3:10) We do not
expect preferential treatment because of our spiritual
relationship, as if our employer owes us time o?, bene?ts, or other advantages not accorded to other employees.—Ephesians 6:5-8.
What if our business involves some kind of joint
venture, perhaps an investment or a loan? The Bible provides an important and useful principle: Put everything
down in writing! For example, when Jeremiah bought a
plot of land, he had a document made out in duplicate,
duly witnessed, and safely stored for future reference.
(Jeremiah 32:9-12; see also Genesis 23:16-20.) When doing business with fellow believers, putting all the details
into a carefully prepared, signed, and witnessed document does not imply distrust. Rather, it helps to prevent
misunderstandings, disappointments, and even divisive
disagreements from arising. Any Christians doing business together should keep in mind that no business venture is ever worth endangering the unity and peace of
the congregation.1—1 Corinthians 6:1-8.
14

1 Regarding what to do should a business arrangement go wrong,
consult the Appendix, pages 285-287.

14. When Christians engage in a joint business venture, what precaution do they wisely take, and why?
Be Honest in All Things

217

HOW HONEST AM I?
Principle: “O Jehovah, who may be a guest in
your tent? . . . The one who is walking faultlessly,
practicing what is right and speaking the truth
in his heart.”—Psalm 15:1, 2.
Some questions to ask yourself
? Why is it important that I always speak the
truth?—Proverbs 6:16, 17.
? How can I “put away deceit” when completing forms, such as school examination papers,
tax returns, or government documents?—Ephesians 4:25; Isaiah 28:15; Matthew 22:17-21; Romans 13:1-7.
? How are both my speech and my actions involved in my being an honest employee?—Proverbs 11:1; Ephesians 4:28; Colossians 3:9, 10.
? If I develop a love of money, how could
that love undermine my e?orts to be truthful?
—Psalm 37:21; 1 Timothy 6:9, 10.
HONESTY IN THE SECULAR WORLD
15

A Christian’s honesty is not limited to the congre-

gation. Paul said: “We wish to conduct ourselves hon15. How does Jehovah feel about dishonest business practices, and how
do Christians respond to such popular trends?
218

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

estly in all things.” (Hebrews 13:18) When it comes to
secular business matters, our Creator is very interested
in honesty. In the book of Proverbs alone, there are several references to dishonest scales. (Proverbs 11:1; 20:
10, 23) In ancient times, it was common to use scales
and weights in business transactions in order to weigh
out the goods purchased and the money used to purchase them. Dishonest merchants would use two sets of
weights and an inaccurate scale to deceive and cheat
their customers.1 Jehovah hates such practices! To remain in his love, we strictly avoid any and all dishonest
business practices.
Because Satan is the ruler of this world, we are not
surprised to ?nd that dishonesty is all around us. Daily
we may face temptations to be dishonest. When people
write up a résumé to apply for work, it is a common
practice to lie and exaggerate, inventing credentials
and falsifying experience. When people ?ll out forms
for immigration, taxation, insurance, and the like, they
16

1 They used one set of weights for buying and another for selling,
favoring themselves either way. They might also use a scale with
one arm longer or heavier than the other so that they could cheat
the customer on any transaction.

16, 17. What forms of dishonesty are common in today’s world, and
what are true Christians resolved to do?
Be Honest in All Things

219

commonly give false answers in order to get what they
want. Many students cheat on tests, or when they write
papers and reports for school, they may go to the Internet and plagiarize what they ?nd there, falsely presenting someone else’s work as their own. And when people
deal with corrupt o?cials, they often o?er bribes to get
what they want. We expect as much in a world where so
many are “lovers of themselves, lovers of money, . . .
without love of goodness.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
True Christians are resolved not to engage in any of
those practices. What makes honesty a challenge at
times is that those who do engage in such dishonest ways
seem to succeed and even get ahead in today’s world.
(Psalm 73:1-8) Meanwhile, Christians may su?er ?nancially because they wish to remain honest “in all things.”
Is it worth the sacri?ces involved? Absolutely! But why?
What blessings result from honest conduct?
17

THE BLES SINGS OF BEING HONEST
18 There are few things you will ever ?nd in life that
are more valuable than a reputation as an honest, trustworthy person. (See the box “How Honest Am I?” on
page 218.) And think of it—anyone can build such a rep18. Why is a reputation for honesty of great value?
220

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

utation! It does not depend on your talent, wealth, looks,
social background, or any other factor beyond your control. Nonetheless, many fail to acquire the treasure of a
good reputation. It is a rarity. (Micah 7:2) Some may
sco? at you for being honest, but others will appreciate
your honesty, and they will reward you with their trust
and their respect. Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have
even found that their honesty bene?ted them ?nancially. They have kept their jobs when dishonest employees
were ?red, or they have found a job when honest employees were desperately needed.
19

Whether that happens to you or not, you will ?nd

that honesty brings even greater blessings. You will have
the blessing of a clean conscience. Paul wrote: “We trust
we have an honest conscience.” (Hebrews 13:18) Furthermore, your reputation never goes unnoticed by our
loving heavenly Father, and he loves honest people.
(Read Psalm 15:1, 2; Proverbs 22:1.) Yes, being honest
helps you to remain in God’s love, and we seek no higher reward than that. Let us next consider a related subject: Jehovah’s view of work.
19. How can a life course of honesty a?ect our conscience and our relationship with Jehovah?
Be Honest in All Things

221

CHAPTER 15

Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work
“Everyone should . . . find enjoyment for all his hard
work.” —ECCLESIASTES 3:13.
FOR many people in today’s world, work is anything
but a pleasure. Laboring long hours at a job that they
do not particularly enjoy, they dread going to work
each day. How can those with such a mind-set be motivated to take a personal interest in their work—let
alone ?nd satisfaction in their job?
2 The Bible promotes a positive view of hard work.
It says that work and its fruitage are a blessing. Solomon wrote: “Everyone should eat and drink and ?nd
enjoyment for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.”
(Ecclesiastes 3:13) Jehovah, who loves us and always
has our best interests at heart, wants us to ?nd satisfaction in our work and to enjoy the fruits of our labor. To remain in his love, we need to live in harmony
with his viewpoint and his principles regarding work.
—Read Ecclesiastes 2:24; 5:18.
1-3. (a) How do many people feel about their job? (b) What view of
work does the Bible promote, and what questions will we consider in
this chapter?
222

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

In this chapter, we will consider four questions:
How can we ?nd enjoyment for our hard work? What
types of work are not for true Christians? How can we
balance secular work with spiritual activities? And
what is the most important work that we can do? First,
though, let us examine the example of the two great3

est workers in the universe—Jehovah God and Jesus
Christ.
THE SUPREME WORKER AND
THE MASTER WORKER
4 Jehovah is the Supreme Worker. Genesis 1:1 states:
“In the beginning God created the heavens and the
earth.” When God completed his creative work involving the earth, he pronounced the results “very good.”
(Genesis 1:31) In other words, he was fully satis?ed
with all his earthly work. Jehovah, “the happy God,”
no doubt found great joy in being a productive worker.—1 Timothy 1:11.
Our industrious God never stops working. Long after physical creation respecting the earth was completed, Jesus said: “My Father has kept working until
5

now.” (John 5:17) What has the Father been doing?
4, 5. How does the Bible indicate that Jehovah is a productive worker?
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

223

From his heavenly realm, he certainly has kept active
in guiding and caring for humankind. He has brought
forth “a new creation,” spirit-begotten Christians who
will eventually rule with Jesus in heaven. (2 Corinthians 5:17) He has been working toward the ful?llment
of his purpose for humans—that those who love him
gain everlasting life in a new world. (Romans 6:23) Jehovah must be very pleased with the results of this
work. Millions have responded to the Kingdom message, being drawn by God and adjusting their life to remain in his love.—John 6:44.
Jesus has a long record of working hard. In his prehuman existence, he served as God’s “master worker”
in the creation of all things “in the heavens and on the
earth.” (Proverbs 8:22-31; Colossians 1:15-17) When
on earth, Jesus continued to be a hard worker. Early
in life, he learned the building trade, becoming known
as “the carpenter.”1 (Mark 6:3) This trade involves
strenuous work and a variety of skills—especially so in
the era before sawmills, supply stores, and power
6

1 The Greek word rendered “carpenter” is said to be “a general
term for a worker in wood whether he worked on houses or furniture or any other type of wooden objects.”

6, 7. What long record of working hard does Jesus have?
224

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tools. Can you imagine Jesus going out to get his own
lumber—perhaps even felling trees and hauling the
wood to wherever he was working? Can you picture
him constructing houses—preparing and installing
the roof beams, making the doors, and even building
some of the furniture? Jesus undoubtedly knew ?rsthand the satisfaction that comes from hard work skillfully done.
Jesus was an outstandingly diligent worker in carrying out his ministry. For three and a half years, he
was intensely occupied with this all-important work.
Wanting to reach as many people as possible, he used
his days to the full, rising early and working on into
the night. (Luke 21:37, 38; John 3:2) He journeyed
“from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the Kingdom of
God.” (Luke 8:1) Jesus literally covered hundreds of
miles, traveling on foot along dusty roads to take the
message of the good news to people.
7

Did Jesus ?nd enjoyment for his hard work in the
ministry? Yes! He sowed seeds of Kingdom truth,
leaving behind ?elds that were ripe for harvesting.
8

8, 9. How did Jesus ?nd enjoyment for his hard work?
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

225

Doing God’s work brought Jesus such strength and
sustenance that he was willing to forgo food for the
sake of getting the work done. (John 4:31-38) Think
about the satisfaction he must have felt when at the
end of his earthly ministry he could truthfully report
to his Father: “I have glori?ed you on the earth, having ?nished the work you have given me to do.”—John
17:4.
9

Surely Jehovah and Jesus are the foremost exam-

ples of ones who ?nd enjoyment for their hard work.
Our love for Jehovah moves us to “become imitators
of God.” (Ephesians 5:1) Our love for Jesus impels us
to “follow his steps closely.” (1 Peter 2:21) So let us
now examine how we too can ?nd enjoyment for our
hard work.

10

HOW TO FIND ENJOYMENT
FOR OUR HARD WORK
Secular work has a place in the life of true Chris-

tians. We want to ?nd satisfaction and a measure of
contentment in our work, but this can be a real challenge if we ?nd ourselves working at a secular job that
10, 11. What can help us to cultivate a positive attitude toward our
job?
226

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

is not to our liking. How is it possible to ?nd enjoyment for our work under such circumstances?
By cultivating a positive attitude. We cannot always
change our circumstances, but we can change our attitude. Meditating on God’s viewpoint can help us to
cultivate a positive attitude toward work. For example, if you are a family head, re?ect on the fact that
your job, no matter how menial it may seem to be, enables you to provide material necessities for your family. Thus caring for your loved ones is no small matter
in God’s eyes. His Word says that one who fails to provide for his family “is worse than a person without
faith.” (1 Timothy 5:8) Recognizing that your job is a
means to an end—making it possible for you to carry
out a God-given responsibility—can help you to ?nd
in your work a measure of ful?llment and purpose
that may elude your coworkers.
11

By being diligent and honest. Working hard and
learning how to do our job well can lead to blessings. Diligent, skillful workers are often highly valued
by their employers. (Proverbs 12:24; 22:29) As true
Christians, we must also be honest in our work—not
12

12. In what ways is it rewarding to be diligent and honest in our work?
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

227

stealing money, materials, or time from our employer.
(Ephesians 4:28) As we saw in the preceding chapter,
honesty is rewarding. An employee with a reputation
for honesty is likely to be trusted. And whether our
employer takes notice of our example as a hard worker or not, we can have the satisfaction that comes from
having “an honest conscience” and knowing that we
are pleasing the God we love.—Hebrews 13:18; Colossians 3:22-24.
By recognizing that our conduct can glorify God.
When we maintain a high standard of Christian conduct at our place of work, others are bound to notice
this. With what result? We may thus “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God.” (Titus 2:9, 10) Yes, our ?ne
conduct can cause others to see the beauty of our way
of worship, making it more attractive to them. Just
think of how you would feel if a coworker responded
to the truth because of your good example in the
workplace! Most important, consider this: What could
be more rewarding than knowing that your ?ne conduct glori?es Jehovah and makes his heart rejoice?
—Read Proverbs 27:11; 1 Peter 2:12.
13

13. Our good example in the workplace may have what results?
228

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

SHOULD I TAKE THE JOB?
Principle: “Do all things for God’s glory.”
—1 Corinthians 10:31.
Some questions to ask yourself
? Does the job involve activities that are directly
condemned in God’s Word?—Exodus 20:13-15.
? Would doing the work make me an accomplice
in a condemned practice?—Revelation 18:4.
? Is the work simply a human service that in itself is not Scripturally objectionable?
—Acts 14:16, 17.
? What is the e?ect of doing the work; will it
hurt the consciences of others?
—Romans 14:19-22.
? If I take up work in another country and leave
my family behind, what might be the emotional
and spiritual e?ects on my family?
—Ephesians 5:28–6:4.
USING DIS CERNMENT
IN OUR CHOICE OF WORK
14 The Bible does not spell out in detail what is acceptable and what is not when it comes to secular
work. This does not mean that we can accept just any
14-16. When facing decisions about employment, what key questions
do we need to consider?
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

229

kind of employment no matter what it involves. The
Scriptures can help us to choose productive, honest
work that is pleasing to God while avoiding employment that would be displeasing to him. (Proverbs 2:6)
When facing decisions about employment, there are
two key questions for us to consider.
15 Would doing this particular work in itself constitute
an act condemned in the Bible? God’s Word clearly condemns stealing, lying, and the making of idols. (Exodus 20:4; Acts 15:29; Ephesians 4:28; Revelation 21:8)
We would reject any employment that required us to
do such things. Our love for Jehovah would never allow us to accept a job that involves engaging in practices that violate God’s commands.—Read 1 John 5:3.
16 Would doing this work clearly make us an accomplice
in or a promoter of a wrong practice? Consider an example. Working as a receptionist is not wrong in itself.
What, though, if a Christian were o?ered such a job at
an abortion clinic? Granted, his job assignment would
not require him to help with the abortion procedures
directly. Nevertheless, would not his regular work
there support the operation of a clinic that exists
to perform abortions—a practice that is contrary to
God’s Word? (Exodus 21:22-24) As lovers of Jehovah,
230

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

we do not want to be closely linked with unscriptural
practices.
Many employment issues can be resolved by carefully analyzing the answers to the two key questions
posed in paragraphs 15 and 16. In addition, there are
some other factors that we do well to weigh when making decisions about employment.1 We cannot expect
the faithful slave to establish rules that will cover
every situation that may arise. Here is where discernment is needed on our part. As we learned in Chapter 2, we need to educate and train our conscience by
studying how to apply God’s Word in our daily life. If
“through use” we train our “powers of discernment,”
our conscience can help us to make decisions that
please God and enable us to remain in his love.—Hebrews 5:14.
17

18

KEEPING A BALANCED ATTITUDE
TOWARD WORK
Maintaining spiritual balance is not easy in these

1 For a more detailed discussion of employment factors to consider, see The Watchtower, April 15, 1999, pages 28-30, and July 15,
1982, page 26.

17. (a) What factors can we weigh in making decisions about employment? (See the box on page 229.) (b) How may our conscience help us
to make decisions that please God?
18. Why is it not easy to maintain spiritual balance?
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

231

“last days” with their “critical times hard to deal
with.” (2 Timothy 3:1) Finding a job and holding on to
it can be a real challenge. As true Christians, we recognize the importance of working hard to provide for
our family. But if we are not careful, pressure in
the workplace or the world’s infectious materialistic
thinking could interfere with our spiritual pursuits.
(1 Timothy 6:9, 10) Let us consider how we can keep
our balance, making sure of “the more important
things.”—Philippians 1:10.
Place your full trust in Jehovah. (Read Proverbs 3:
5, 6.) Is he not worthy of such trust? After all, he cares
for us. (1 Peter 5:7) He knows our needs better than we
do, and his hand is never short. (Psalm 37:25) We
therefore do well to listen when his Word reminds us:
“Let your way of life be free of the love of money,
while you are content with the present things. For
[God] has said: ‘I will never leave you, and I will never
abandon you.’ ” (Hebrews 13:5) Many full-time servants can testify to God’s ability to provide life’s necessities. If we fully trust that Jehovah will care for
us, we will avoid becoming unduly anxious about
19

19. Why is Jehovah worthy of our full trust, and what does such trust
help us to avoid?
232

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

“MY DECISION LED TO A LIFE OF JOY
AND CONTENTMENT”
“I excelled in my studies and won a full
scholarship to a well-respected private school
in New York City. My school counselors pressured me to apply to several prestigious universities. I was accepted by a few of them and even
earned a scholarship to one of the most renowned universities in the United States. However, I turned the o?er down for two reasons. I
could foresee the moral dangers of living on
campus away from home, and I had a strong desire to pioneer.
“I have now been a regular pioneer for
more than 20 years. I have kept myself busy in
many avenues of the ministry—serving where
the need is greater, helping with Kingdom Hall
construction, and assisting with disaster relief
work. Currently, I have the pleasure of serving
with a foreign-language group in New York
City.
“Looking back on my career in full-time service, I realize how blessed I have been. My decision led to a life of joy and contentment. I
wouldn’t exchange the experiences I’ve had and
the friendships I’ve made for anything.”—Zenaida.
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

233

providing for our family. (Matthew 6:25-32) We will
not allow secular work to cause us to neglect spiritual
activities, such as preaching the good news and attending meetings.—Matthew 24:14; Hebrews 10:24, 25.
Keep your eye focused. (Read Matthew 6:22, 23.) Having a focused eye means keeping our life uncomplicated. A Christian’s eye is focused on a single purpose
—the doing of God’s will. If our eye is thus focused,
we will not be obsessed with chasing after a highpaying job and a more elaborate lifestyle. Neither will
we get caught up in the never-ending quest for the latest and best material things that advertisers would
have us believe we need in order to be happy. How can
you maintain a focused eye? Avoid burdening yourself
with unnecessary debt. Do not clutter your life with
possessions that consume inordinate amounts of time
and attention. Heed the Bible’s counsel to be content
with “food and clothing.” (1 Timothy 6:8) Seek to simplify your life as much as possible.
20

21

Set spiritual priorities, and stick to them. Since we

20. What does it mean to keep a focused eye, and how can you maintain such an outlook?
21. Why do we need to establish priorities, and what should come ?rst
in our life?
234

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

can do only so much in life, we need to establish priorities. Otherwise, less important things could swallow up precious time, crowding out the more important things. What should have top priority in our life?
Many in the world place primary emphasis on pursuing higher education in order to have a lucrative
career in this system. Jesus, however, urged his followers to “keep on . . . seeking ?rst the Kingdom.” (Matthew 6:33) Yes, as true Christians, we put God’s Kingdom ?rst in our life. Our pattern of life—the choices
we make, the goals we set, and the activities we pursue—ought to show that Kingdom interests and God’s
will are more important to us than material concerns
and secular pursuits.
22

WORKING HARD IN THE MINISTRY
Knowing that we are living deep in the time of the

end, we keep focused on the main work of true Christians—preaching and disciple making. (Matthew 24:
14; 28:19, 20) Like our Exemplar, Jesus, we want to be
intensely occupied with this lifesaving work. How can
22, 23. (a) What is the main work of true Christians, and how can
we show that this work is important to us? (See the box on page 233.)
(b) What is your determination regarding secular work?
Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work

235

we show that this work is important to us? The majority of God’s people devote themselves to the preaching work wholeheartedly as congregation publishers.
Some have arranged their a?airs to serve as pioneers
or missionaries. Recognizing the importance of spiritual goals, many parents have encouraged their children to pursue a career in the full-time service. Do
zealous Kingdom proclaimers ?nd enjoyment for their
hard work in the ministry? Indeed, they do! Serving Jehovah whole-souled is the sure way to a life of joy,
satisfaction, and countless blessings.—Read Proverbs
10:22.
Many of us have to spend long hours in secular
work to provide materially for our family. Remember
that Jehovah wants us to ?nd enjoyment for our hard
work. By bringing our attitude and actions into harmony with his viewpoint and principles, we can ?nd satisfaction in our work. Let us, however, be determined
never to allow secular work to distract us from our
main work—that of declaring the good news of God’s
Kingdom. By giving this work priority in our life, we
show our love for Jehovah and thereby remain in his
love.
23

236

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

CHAPTER 16

Oppose the Devil and
His Crafty Acts
“Oppose the Devil, and he will flee.”
—JAMES 4:7.

IF YOU have been serving Jehovah for decades, you
have likely heard numerous baptism talks at our assemblies and conventions. Yet, no matter how often
you have been present on such occasions, you likely
still feel moved each time you witness the moment
that those sitting in the front rows of the auditorium
stand up to present themselves for baptism. At that instant, a buzz of excitement ripples through the audience, followed by a burst of heartfelt applause. Tears
may well up in your eyes as you look at yet another
group of precious individuals who have taken sides
with Jehovah. What joy we feel at such times!
2

While we may witness baptisms a few times a year

in our locality, the angels are privileged to observe
them much more often. Can you imagine how much
1, 2. For whom are baptisms occasions for joy?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

237

“joy in heaven” there must be as they see thousands
of individuals worldwide added to the visible part of
Jehovah’s organization each week? (Luke 15:7, 10) No
doubt, the angels are thrilled to observe this increase!
—Haggai 2:7.

3

THE DEVIL “WALKS AB OUT
LIKE A ROARING LION”
In stark contrast, however, there are spirit crea-

tures who observe those baptisms with fury. For Satan and the demons, it is galling to see thousands turn
their backs on this corrupt world. After all, Satan
boasted that no humans serve Jehovah out of genuine
love and that none would remain faithful under severe
test. (Read Job 2:4, 5.) Every time someone is moved
to dedicate himself to Jehovah, Satan is proved wrong.
It is as if Satan receives thousands of slaps in the face
every week of the year. No wonder he “walks about
like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone”! (1 Peter 5:8) This “lion” is eager to devour us spiritually,
causing us to damage or even sever our relationship
with God.—Psalm 7:1, 2; 2 Timothy 3:12.
3. Why is Satan walking about “like a roaring lion,” and what does
he want to do?
238

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

4

Although we face a ?erce foe, we have no reason to

be overwhelmed by fear. Why not? Because Jehovah
has restricted the reach of that “roaring lion” in two
important ways. What are they? First of all, Jehovah
has foretold that “a great crowd” of true Christians
will survive the coming “great tribulation.” (Revelation 7:9, 14) God’s prophecies never fail. Therefore,
even Satan must know that God’s people as a whole
are beyond his reach.
5

The second restriction can be deduced from a ba-

sic truth spoken by one of God’s faithful men of old.
The prophet Azariah said to King Asa: “Jehovah is
with you as long as you remain with him.” (2 Chronicles 15:2; read 1 Corinthians 10:13.) Numerous recorded examples demonstrate that in the past, Satan always failed to devour any of God’s servants who
remained close to God. (Hebrews 11:4-40) Today, a
Christian who stays close to God will be able to oppose and even conquer the Devil. In fact, God’s Word
assures us: “Oppose the Devil, and he will ?ee from
you.”—James 4:7.
4, 5. (a) Jehovah has restricted Satan’s in?uence in what two important ways? (b) Of what can a true Christian be assured?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

239

“WE HAVE A STRUG GLE . . . AGAINST THE
WICKED SPIRIT FORCES”
6 Satan cannot win the war, so to speak, but he can
make casualties of us as individuals if we let our guard
down. Satan knows that he can devour us if he can
weaken our bond with Jehovah. How does Satan try
to achieve this? By attacking us intensely, personally,
and cunningly. Let us consider these main strategies
of Satan.
7 Intense attacks. The apostle John stated: “The
whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.”
(1 John 5:19) Those words contain a warning for all
true Christians. Since Satan has already devoured the
entire ungodly world of mankind, he can now focus
on and intensify his attacks on those who have so far
eluded him—Jehovah’s people. (Micah 4:1; John 15:
19; Revelation 12:12, 17) He has great anger because
he knows his time is short. So he has stepped up the
pressure. Today, we face his ?nal rampage of savagery and destruction.
8 Personal struggle. The apostle Paul warned fellow
6. How does Satan ?ght against individual Christians?
7. Why is Satan intensely attacking Jehovah’s people?
8. What does the apostle Paul mean when he states that we have “a
struggle” against wicked spirits?
240

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Christians: “We have a struggle [“wrestling,” footnote]
. . . against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly
places.” (Ephesians 6:12) Why did Paul use the term
“struggle”? Because it conveys the idea of hand-tohand combat. Thus, by using that term, Paul stressed
that each of us has a personal ?ght with wicked spirits. Whether we live in a country where belief in wicked spirits is prevalent or not, we should never forget
that when we dedicated ourselves to Jehovah, we
stepped on the wrestling mat, as it were. At least from
dedication onward, each Christian is locked in combat. No wonder that Paul saw the need to urge Christians in Ephesus three times to “stand ?rm”!—Ephesians 6:11, 13, 14.
9 Cunning schemes. Paul exhorts Christians to stand
?rm against Satan’s “crafty acts.” (Ephesians 6:11)
Note Paul’s use of the plural. Wicked spirits use
not one but various cunning schemes—and for good
reason. In the course of time, some believers who have
stood ?rm against one kind of trial have given in when
9. (a) Why do Satan and the demons employ various “crafty acts”?
(b) Why does Satan try to corrupt our thinking, and how can we resist his e?orts? (See the box on pages 249-251.) (c) Which crafty act
will we now consider?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

241

faced with another. Hence, the Devil and the demons
closely observe the behavior of each one of us to detect our weakest spot. Then they exploit any spiritual
weakness we may have. Thankfully, though, we can
recognize many of the Devil’s methods, for they are
revealed in the Bible. (2 Corinthians 2:11) Earlier in
this publication, we discussed such schemes as the
lure of materialism, harmful association, and sexual
immorality. Let us now consider yet another one of
Satan’s crafty acts—spiritism.
PRACTICING SPIRITISM—AN ACT OF BETRAYAL
10 By practicing spiritism, or demonism, one makes

direct contact with wicked spirits. Divination, sorcery, binding with spells, and inquiring of the dead are
some forms of spiritism. As we well know, Jehovah
views spiritism as “detestable.” (Deuteronomy 18:1012; Revelation 21:8) Since we too must “abhor what is
wicked,” it is unthinkable that we would ever seek out
the company of wicked spirit forces. (Romans 12:9)
What a repulsive act of betrayal against our heavenly
Father, Jehovah, that would be!
10. (a) What is spiritism? (b) How does Jehovah view spiritism, and
how do you view it?
242

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

11

However, for the very reason that dabbling in spir-

itism is gross treachery against Jehovah, Satan is bent
on getting some of us involved in it. Each time he can
induce a Christian to turn to demonism, Satan scores
a grand victory. Why? Think of this comparison: If a
soldier could be persuaded to desert and betray his
army unit and join enemy forces, the enemy commander would be delighted. He might even parade the
traitor as a trophy, so as to insult that soldier’s former
army commander. Similarly, if a Christian turned to
spiritism, he would willingly and knowingly desert Jehovah and place himself directly under Satan’s command. Imagine what pleasure it would give Satan to
parade that deserter as a trophy of war! Would any of
us want to hand the Devil such a victory? Absolutely
not! We are not traitors.
RAISING QUESTIONS TO CREATE D OUBTS
12 As long as we abhor spiritism, Satan will not suc-

ceed against us by using it. Hence, he realizes that he
must change our thinking. How? He seeks ways to
11. Why would it be a grand victory for Satan if he could induce us
to turn to spiritism? Illustrate.
12. What method does Satan use to in?uence our view of spiritism?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

243

confuse Christians to the point that some will think
that “good is bad and bad is good.” (Isaiah 5:20) To
do so, Satan often falls back on one of his time-tested
methods—he raises questions to create doubts.
13 Notice how Satan used that approach in the past.
In Eden he asked Eve: “Did God really say that you
must not eat from every tree of the garden?” In Job’s
time, during a meeting of the angels in heaven, Satan
raised the question: “Is it for nothing that Job has
feared God?” And at the start of Jesus’ earthly ministry, Satan challenged Christ by saying: “If you are a son
of God, tell these stones to become loaves of bread.”
Imagine—in Jesus’ case, Satan dared to mock the very
words that Jehovah himself had spoken some six
weeks earlier: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I
have approved”!—Genesis 3:1; Job 1:9; Matthew 3:17;
4:3.
14 Today, the Devil uses a similar scheme in an effort to create uncertainties about the wickedness of
spiritism. Sadly, he has succeeded in raising doubts in
13. How has Satan used the method of raising questions to create
doubts?
14. (a) How does Satan use his scheme of creating uncertainties regarding spiritism? (b) What will we now consider?
244

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

the minds of some believers. They have begun to question whether certain forms of spiritism are truly all
that evil. (2 Corinthians 11:3) How can we help such
ones to adjust their thinking? How can we make sure
that Satan’s scheme fails to in?uence us? To answer,
let us consider two areas of life that Satan has slyly
contaminated with spiritistic elements. They are entertainment and health care.
EXPLOITING OUR DESIRES AND NEEDS
15 Especially in the Western world, occultism, witchcraft, and other forms of spiritism are taken more and
more lightly. Movies, books, TV programs, and computer games increasingly portray demonistic practices as being fun, smart, and harmless. Some movies
and books with plots focusing on the occult have become so wildly popular that devotees have organized
fan clubs. Clearly, the demons have succeeded in trivializing the dangers of the occult. Has this trend of
taking spiritism lightly in?uenced Christians? The
thinking of some has been a?ected. In what way? To
give a typical example, after one Christian watched a
movie that centered on the occult, he said, “I saw the
15. (a) How do many in the Western world view spiritism? (b) How
have some Christians been in?uenced by the world’s view of spiritism?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

245

movie, but I didn’t practice spiritism.” Why is such reasoning dangerous?
16 Although there is a di?erence between actually
practicing spiritism and watching it, that surely does
not mean that watching occult practices poses no danger. Why not? Consider this: God’s Word indicates
that neither Satan nor his demons have the ability to
read our thoughts.1 Thus, as mentioned earlier, to ?nd
out what we are thinking and to detect any spiritual
weakness in us, wicked spirits have to observe closely our actions—including our choice of entertainment. When a Christian’s behavior shows that he enjoys movies or books that center on spirit mediums,
magic spells, acts of demon possession, or similar demonistic subjects, he is sending a message to the demons. In e?ect, he is alerting them to his weak spot!
In response, the demons could intensify their wrestling with that Christian in order to exploit the weak1 The descriptive names given to Satan (Resister, Slanderer, Deceiver, Tempter, Liar) do not imply that he has the ability to search
our hearts and minds. By way of contrast, however, Jehovah is described as “the examiner of hearts,” and Jesus, as the one who
“searches the innermost thoughts and hearts.”—Proverbs 17:3; Revelation 2:23.

16. Why is it dangerous to choose entertainment that centers on occult practices?
246

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ness he has revealed until they have pinned him down,
so to speak. In fact, some whose interest in spiritism
was ?rst piqued by entertainment that prominently
featured the occult have eventually become involved
in actually practicing spiritism.—Read Galatians 6:7.
17 Satan tries to exploit not only our desire for entertainment but also our need for health care. How?
A Christian whose health is failing despite numerous
e?orts to ?nd a cure may become despondent. (Mark
5:25, 26) That can provide Satan and the demons
with a favorable opportunity to exploit him. The demons may tempt an ailing one to turn in desperation
to treatments or procedures that involve the use of
“magical power,” or spiritism. (Isaiah 1:13) If that
crafty act of the demons succeeds, it could weaken the
ailing one’s relationship with God. In what way?
18 Jehovah warned the Israelites who had resorted to “magical power”: “When you spread out your
palms, I hide my eyes from you. Although you o?er
many prayers, I am not listening.” (Isaiah 1:15) Of
course, we always want to avoid anything that might
17. By means of what crafty act may Satan exploit those who are ailing?
18. What types of procedures would a Christian reject, and why?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

247

hinder our prayers and diminish the support that we
receive from Jehovah—and all the more so during a
period of illness. (Psalm 41:3) Hence, if there are indications that a certain diagnostic procedure or therapeutic treatment may contain spiritistic elements, a
true Christian should reject it.1 (Matthew 6:13) In
that way, he will be sure to retain Jehovah’s backing.
—See the box “Is It Really Spiritism?” on page 252.
WHEN STORIES AB OUT DEMONS AB OUND
19 Whereas many people in Western lands make

light of the danger of Satan’s power, the opposite occurs in other parts of the world. There the Devil has
fooled many into believing that he has more power than he really does have. Some people live, eat,
work, and sleep in dread of wicked spirits. Stories
about powerful acts of demons abound. Such stories
are often told with relish; people are fascinated by
them. Should we share in spreading such stories?
1 For further information, see the article “A Health Test for You?”
in the December 15, 1994, issue of The Watchtower, pages 19-22, and
the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Your Choice of Medical Treatment—Does It Matter?” in the January 8, 2001, issue of Awake!

19. (a) The Devil has fooled many people into believing what about
his power? (b) What stories should true Christians avoid?
248

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

BEWARE OF SATAN’S CUNNING!
Satan, a master of deception, has “blinded the
minds of the unbelievers” for thousands of years
now. (2 Corinthians 4:4) He has also been relentless in his e?orts to corrupt the thinking of God’s
worshippers. Why? Satan understands that how
we think a?ects the way we act. He knows that if
he can distort our thinking, he can in?uence our
actions for bad.—James 1:14, 15.
Remember Satan’s method of misleading Eve.
The apostle Paul wrote: “I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent seduced Eve by its cunning,
your minds might be corrupted away from . . . the
Christ.” (2 Corinthians 11:3) Working through a
cautious serpent, Satan seduced Eve into following a disastrous course. He sought to corrupt her
mind, to warp her thinking. The tactic worked.
Because she listened, her viewpoint changed, and
what was unlawful became desirable. Once her
mind was corrupted, she was easily drawn into a
sinful act.—Genesis 3:1-6; Revelation 12:9.
Satan has not changed. His basic tenet remains
the same: Corrupt the mind, and sinful actions
will follow. Satan has this system’s politics, religion, commerce, and entertainment set up to
spread his propaganda. (John 14:30) He has succeeded in distorting the thinking of the vast majority of mankind, changing their attitudes and
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

249

viewpoints. Conduct that was once viewed as sinful—such as practicing homosexuality, living together without marriage, and bearing children out
of wedlock—is often viewed as acceptable, even
desirable. How e?ective has Satan been in seducing humans? The Bible says: “The whole world is
lying in the power of the wicked one.”—1 John
5:19.
As Christians, we are by no means immune
to Satan’s methods. (1 Corinthians 10:12) Knowing that his time is short, Satan has “great anger”
and is especially intent on misleading God’s people. (Revelation 12:12) If we are not careful, the
subtle propaganda of Satan and the many “deceivers” whom he uses can corrupt our thinking and
seduce us into sin.—Titus 1:10.
For example, consider the world’s view of
marriage. The Bible teaches that marriage is sacred, involving a lasting commitment. (Matthew
19:5, 6, 9) This world’s movies and television programs often portray marriage as a casual agreement that can easily be abandoned. As Christians,
we need to beware that this satanic propaganda
does not corrupt our thinking. Left unchecked,
this in?uence could distort our viewpoint, weakening our commitment to our mate. Faced with
marital problems, we might be tempted to look
outside the marriage for understanding and support. Soon another person—perhaps a coworker
250

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

or a fellow believer—might seem to o?er emotional closeness. If we allow a romantic attachment to
form, we may ?nd ourselves drawn into a sinful
act.
As another example, consider the spirit of independence that permeates Satan’s world. Many
are “headstrong, pu?ed up with pride.” (2 Timothy
3:4) If such a spirit were to corrupt our thinking, our view of submission and obedience might
become distorted. Infected by this spirit, a brother
might chafe at counsel from the elders. (Hebrews
12:5) A sister might begin to question God’s arrangement of headship.—1 Corinthians 11:3.
We can be thankful that Jehovah warns us
about Satan’s methods. (2 Corinthians 2:11) Let
us be determined never to allow satanic propaganda to make inroads into our thinking. To remain
in God’s love, we need to keep our “minds ?xed
on the things above.”—Colossians 3:2.
No, servants of the true God avoid doing so for two
important reasons.
20 First, by circulating stories about the exploits of
the demons, one promotes the interests of Satan. How
so? God’s Word con?rms that Satan is capable of powerful works, but it also warns that he uses “lying signs”
20. How could one, perhaps unwittingly, spread Satan’s propaganda?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

251

and “deception.” (2 Thessalonians 2:9, 10) Since Satan is the archdeceiver, he knows how to in?uence the
minds of those who are inclined toward spiritism and
how to make them believe things that are not true.
Such ones may sincerely believe that they saw and
heard certain things and may relate their experiences
as truth. In time, their stories become exaggerated by
constant retelling. If a Christian were to spread such
stories, he would, in e?ect, be doing the bidding of the
Devil—“the father of the lie.” He would be spreading
Satan’s propaganda.—John 8:44; 2 Timothy 2:16.

IS IT REALLY SPIRITISM?
Principle: “The works of the flesh are plainly seen,
and they are . . . spiritism, . . . divisions, sects . . .
Those who practice such things will not inherit God’s
Kingdom.”—Galatians 5:19-21.
Some questions to ask yourself
? Is any custom that I follow associated with
false religious beliefs?—2 Corinthians 6:16, 17.
? Are any objects that I use directly related to
spiritistic practices?—Acts 19:19.
? Does any medical treatment I seek involve some
form of magical power?—Leviticus 19:26.
252

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Second, even if a Christian had some real encounters with wicked spirits in the past, he would refrain
from repeatedly entertaining fellow believers with
stories about such things. Why? We are admonished:
“Look intently at the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our
faith, Jesus.” (Hebrews 12:2) Yes, we are to focus our
attention on Christ, not Satan. It is noteworthy that
while on earth, Jesus did not entertain his disciples
with stories about wicked spirits, although he could
have said much about what Satan could or could not
do. Rather, Jesus focused on the Kingdom message.
Therefore, in imitation of Jesus and the apostles, we
want to center our conversations on “the magni?cent
things of God.”—Acts 2:11; Luke 8:1; Romans 1:11, 12.
22 True, Satan employs various crafty acts, including
spiritism, to try to destroy our relationship with Jehovah. However, by abhorring what is wicked and clinging to what is good, we give the Devil no opportunity
to weaken our resolve to reject spiritism in all its
forms. (Read Ephesians 4:27.) Imagine what great “joy
in heaven” there will be if we continue to “stand ?rm
against the crafty acts of the Devil” until he is no
more!—Luke 15:7; Ephesians 6:11.
21

21. On what do we want to center our conversations?
22. How may we continue to contribute to “joy in heaven”?
Oppose the Devil and His Crafty Acts

253

CHAPTER 17

“Build Yourselves Up on Your
Most Holy Faith”
“Build yourselves up on your most holy faith . . .
Keep yourselves in God’s love.” —JUDE 20, 21.
YOU are hard at work on a building project. The construction has been going on for some time and will continue well into the future. So far, the work has been
challenging yet ful?lling. Come what may, you are determined never to give up or slack o?, for the quality of your
work will a?ect your life, even your future. Why? Because the building under construction is you!
2 The disciple Jude stressed the building work that we
do on ourselves. When he urged Christians to “keep yourselves in God’s love,” he also revealed in the same passage the key to doing so, saying: “Build yourselves up on
your most holy faith.” (Jude 20, 21) What are some ways
that you can build yourself up, making your faith stronger so that you will remain in God’s love? Let us focus
on three aspects of the spiritual building project before
you.
1, 2. What building project are you involved in, and why is the quality of your work so important?
254

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

KEEP BUILDING FAITH IN JEHOVAH’S
RIGHTEOUS REQUIREMENTS
3 First of all, we need to strengthen our faith in divine
law. In the course of studying this book, you have considered a number of Jehovah’s righteous requirements
regarding conduct. What is your view of them? Satan
would like to mislead you into viewing Jehovah’s laws,
principles, and standards as restrictive, even oppressive.
He has been using this tactic ever since it proved so effective way back in Eden. (Genesis 3:1-6) Will his tactic
work on you? Much will depend on your point of view.
To illustrate: As you walk along in a pleasant park,
you notice a sturdy high fence blocking o? part of the
grounds. The landscape beyond the fence looks inviting.
At ?rst, you might view the fence as a needless restriction of your freedom. As you look through it, though, you
notice a ferocious lion stalking prey on the other side!
Now you see the fence for what it is—a protection. Is
there a dangerous predator stalking you right now? God’s
Word warns: “Keep your senses, be watchful! Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking
to devour someone.”—1 Peter 5:8.
4

3-5. (a) Satan would like to mislead you into having what view of Jehovah’s requirements? (b) What should be our viewpoint of God’s
requirements, and what e?ect should it have on how we feel? Illustrate.
“Build Yourselves Up on Your Most Holy Faith”

255

5

Satan is a vicious predator. Because Jehovah does not

want us to become Satan’s prey, He has instituted laws
to protect us from the many “crafty acts” of that wicked
one. (Ephesians 6:11) So whenever we meditate on God’s
laws, we should see in them the love of our heavenly Father. Viewed in that light, God’s laws are a source of security and joy. The disciple James wrote: “The one who
peers into the perfect law that belongs to freedom and
continues in it . . . will be happy in what he does.”—James
1:25.
6

Living by God’s commandments is the best way to

build up our faith in the Lawgiver and in the wisdom of
his laws. For example, “the law of the Christ” includes
Jesus’ command to teach others “all the things [he has]
commanded.” (Galatians 6:2; Matthew 28:19, 20) Christians also take seriously the directive to keep on meeting
together for worship and upbuilding association. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) God’s commandments include, too, the
exhortation to pray to Jehovah regularly and often and
from the heart. (Matthew 6:5-8; 1 Thessalonians 5:17) As
we live by such commands, we see ever more clearly what
6. What is the best way to build faith in God’s righteous laws and principles? Give an example.
256

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

loving guidelines they provide. Obeying them brings us a
measure of joy and satisfaction that we could never ?nd
elsewhere in this troubled world. As you meditate on how
you have personally bene?ted by living in accord with
God’s laws, does not your faith in them get stronger?
7

Some worry, at times, that it will be too hard to stick

with Jehovah’s laws as the years pass. They fear that
somehow they may fail. If you ever feel that way, keep
these words in mind: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One
teaching you to bene?t yourself, the One guiding you
in the way you should walk. If only you would pay
attention to my commandments! Then your peace would
become just like a river and your righteousness like the
waves of the sea.” (Isaiah 48:17, 18) Have you ever paused
to think about how reassuring those words are?
8

Jehovah here reminds us that we bene?t ourselves by

obeying him. He promises two blessings if we do so. First,
our peace will be like a river—serene, abundant, ongoing. Second, our righteousness will be like the waves of
the sea. If you stand on a beach and watch the waves roll
in one after the other, you no doubt feel a sense of
7, 8. How does God’s Word reassure those who worry that they may
not be able to maintain a righteous course as the years pass?
“Build Yourselves Up on Your Most Holy Faith”

257

permanence. You know that the waves will keep coming, breaking on that beach for countless ages to come.
Jehovah says that your righteousness—your course of
doing right—can be like that. As long as you endeavor to
be faithful to him, he will never let you fall! (Read Psalm
55:22.) Do not such heartwarming promises build up
your faith in Jehovah and in his righteous requirements?

“PRES S ON TO MATURITY”
9 A second aspect of your building project is revealed
in these inspired words: “Let us press on to maturity.”
(Hebrews 6:1) Maturity is a wonderful goal for a Christian. Unlike perfection, which for now is beyond the
reach of humans, maturity is an attainable goal. Further,
Christians ?nd greater joy in serving Jehovah as they mature. Why is that?
10

A mature Christian is a spiritual person. He looks at

things from Jehovah’s point of view. (John 4:23) Paul
wrote: “Those who live according to the ?esh set their
minds on the things of the ?esh, but those who live according to the spirit, on the things of the spirit.” (Romans
8:5) A ?eshly outlook brings little joy, for it tends to
9, 10. (a) Why is maturity a wonderful goal for Christians? (b) How
does a spiritual outlook contribute to joy?
258

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

be self-centered, shortsighted, and focused on material
things. A spiritual outlook is joyous, for it is focused on
Jehovah, “the happy God.” (1 Timothy 1:11) A spiritual
person is eager to please Jehovah and rejoices even when
under trial. Why? Trials present opportunities to prove
Satan a liar and to build integrity, delighting our heavenly Father.—Proverbs 27:11; read James 1:2, 3.
Spirituality and maturity come through training.
Consider this verse: “Solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong.”
(Hebrews 5:14) When Paul spoke of our powers of discernment being “trained,” he used a Greek word that was
likely in common use in the gymnasiums of ?rst-century
Greece, for it can be rendered ‘trained like a gymnast.’
Now think of what such training involves.
11

When we were born, our body was untrained. For example, a baby is barely able to perceive the orientation
of its little limbs. Hence, a baby waves its arms randomly, even striking itself on the face, much to the baby’s own
12

11, 12. (a) What did Paul say about a Christian’s “powers of discernment,” and what is the meaning of the word rendered “trained”?
(b) What training must the body undergo in order to mature and become physically adept?
“Build Yourselves Up on Your Most Holy Faith”

259

dismay and surprise. Gradually, through use, the body is
trained. The baby crawls, the toddler walks, the child
runs.1 Ah, but what about a gymnast? When you see such
an athlete vaulting and twisting through the air with exquisite grace and precision, there is no question in your
mind that the body is like a ?nely tuned machine. The
gymnast’s expertise did not come about by accident
—countless hours of training were required. Such physical training, the Bible acknowledges, is “bene?cial for a
little.” How much more valuable is the training of our
spiritual powers of discernment!—1 Timothy 4:8.
In this book, we have discussed much that will help
you to train your powers of discernment so that you can
remain faithful to Jehovah as a spiritual person. Prayerfully consider divine principles and laws as you make decisions in your day-to-day life. In every decision you face,
ask yourself: ‘What Bible laws or principles bear on this
matter? How can I apply them? What course will please
my heavenly Father?’ (Read Proverbs 3:5, 6; James 1:5.)
13

1 Scientists say that we develop a special sense called proprioception, which is the body’s sense of its own orientation and the
placement of the limbs. For example, this sense enables you to clap
your hands with your eyes closed. One adult patient who lost her
proprioception was unable to stand, walk, or even sit up as a result.

13. How can we train our powers of discernment?
260

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Each decision you make in that way will further train
your powers of discernment. Such training will help you
to become and remain a truly spiritual person.
While maturity is attainable, there is always room
for spiritual growth. Growth is dependent on food. Paul
thus noted: “Solid food belongs to mature people.” A key
to building up your faith is to keep taking in solid
spiritual food. As you rightly apply what you learn, that
is wisdom, and the Bible says: “Wisdom is the most important thing.” Thus, we need to develop a genuine hunger for the precious truths our Father imparts. (Proverbs
4:5-7; 1 Peter 2:2) Of course, gaining knowledge and godly wisdom is no reason to become smug or haughty.
We need to examine ourselves regularly lest pride or
some other weakness takes root and grows in our heart.
Paul wrote: “Keep testing whether you are in the faith;
keep proving what you yourselves are.”—2 Corinthians
13:5.
14

Construction of a house may be completed, yet work
goes on. Maintenance and repairs are essential, and additions may be necessary as circumstances change. What
15

14. We need to acquire what appetite in order to grow spiritually, yet
what caution do we need to keep in mind?
15. Why is love essential to spiritual growth?
“Build Yourselves Up on Your Most Holy Faith”

261

do we need in order to mature and to maintain our spirituality? Above all, love. We need to keep growing in love
for Jehovah and for our fellow believers. If we do not have
love, all our knowledge and works would amount to nothing—like a lot of empty noise. (1 Corinthians 13:1-3)
With love, we can attain Christian maturity and continue growing spiritually.

KEEP YOUR MIND FO CUSED ON THE HOPE
JEHOVAH PROVIDES
16 Let us consider one more aspect of your building project. In order to build yourself up as a genuine follower
of Christ, you need to guard the way you think. Satan,
the ruler of this world, is a master at getting people to
give in to negative thinking, pessimism, distrust, and despair. (Ephesians 2:2) Such thinking is as dangerous to a
Christian as dry rot is to a wooden building. Happily, Jehovah provides a vital defensive tool—hope.
The Bible lists the various parts of the suit of spiritual armor we need in our ?ght against Satan and this
world. A prominent piece of the armor is the helmet, “the
hope of salvation.” (1 Thessalonians 5:8) A soldier in Bi17

16. Satan promotes what kind of thinking, and what defense has Jehovah provided?
17. How does God’s Word illustrate the importance of hope?
262

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

ble times knew that he would not last long in battle without his helmet. Often made of metal and ?tted over a cap
of felt or leather, the helmet ensured that most blows directed at the head would glance o? with little harm done.
As a helmet protects the head, hope can protect your
mind, your thinking.
18

Jesus set the prime example in maintaining hope. Re-

member what he endured on the ?nal night of his life on
earth. An intimate friend betrayed him for money. Another denied even knowing him. The others abandoned
him and ?ed. His own countrymen turned against him,
crying out for his death by torture at the hands of Roman
soldiers. It seems safe to say that Jesus faced heavier
trials than we will ever face. What helped him? Hebrews
12:2 answers: “For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down
at the right hand of the throne of God.” Jesus never lost
sight of “the joy that was set before him.”
19

What joy was set before Jesus? Well, he knew that by

enduring, he would contribute to the sancti?cation of
Jehovah’s holy name. He would provide the greatest
18, 19. Jesus set what example in maintaining hope, and how can we
imitate him?
“Build Yourselves Up on Your Most Holy Faith”

263

possible proof that Satan is a liar. No hope could give Jesus greater joy! He knew, too, that Jehovah would richly
reward his faithful course—that just ahead of him lay a
wonderful time when he would be reunited with his Father. Jesus kept such a joyful hope in his mind throughout the worst of times. We need to do the same. We too
have joy set before us. Jehovah digni?es each of us with
the privilege of helping to sanctify his great name. We
can prove Satan a liar by choosing Jehovah as our Sovereign and keeping ourselves safe in the love of our Father no matter what trials and temptations we may face.
20

Jehovah is not just willing to reward his faithful ser-

vants—he is eager to do so. (Isaiah 30:18; read Malachi 3:
10.) He delights in granting his servants the righteous desires of their heart. (Psalm 37:4) So keep your mind ?rmly focused on the hope that lies before you. Never give in
to the negative, degraded, twisted thinking of Satan’s old
world. If you sense that the spirit of this world is making
inroads into your mind or heart, pray fervently to Jehovah for “the peace of God that surpasses all understanding.” That God-given peace will guard your heart and
your mental powers.—Philippians 4:6, 7.
20. What can help you to keep your thinking positive and hopeful?
264

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

What a thrilling hope you have to ponder! If you are
part of the “great crowd,” who will “come out of the great
tribulation,” think of the life that will soon open up before you. (Revelation 7:9, 14) With Satan and his demons
out of the way, you will feel relief that may be hard to
fathom now. Who of us, after all, has ever experienced
life without the pressure of Satan’s corrupting in?uence?
With that pressure gone, what a joy it will be to work at
transforming the earth into a paradise under the direction of Jesus and his 144,000 heavenly corulers! How we
thrill at the prospect of seeing all sicknesses and in?rmities done away with, of welcoming back our loved ones
from the grave, of living life the way God meant us to live
it! As we grow to perfection, an even greater reward will
draw ever closer, the promise revealed at Romans 8:21
—“the glorious freedom of the children of God.”
22 Jehovah wants you to attain a greater measure of
freedom than you can even imagine. The path to that
freedom lies in obedience. Is it not worth every e?ort you
can put forth now to obey Jehovah day by day? By all
means, then, continue to build yourself up on your most
holy faith, that you may remain in God’s love for all eternity!
21

21, 22. (a) What glorious hope do those of the “great crowd” cherish? (b) What part of the Christian hope means the most to you, and
what is your resolve?
“Build Yourselves Up on Your Most Holy Faith”

265

APPENDIX
TOPIC

PAGE

How to Treat a Disfellowshipped Person
Head Coverings—When and Why?

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

267

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

270

Flag Salute, Voting, and Civilian Service

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

273

Blood Fractions and Surgical Procedures · · · · · · · · · · · · · · 277
Gain the Victory Over Masturbation

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

The Bible’s View on Divorce and Separation
Resolving Disputes in Business Matters

266

280

· · · · · · · ·

282

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

285

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

How to Treat a Disfellowshipped Person
Few things can hurt us more deeply than the pain we suffer when a relative or a close friend is expelled from the congregation for unrepentant sin. How we respond to the Bible’s direction on this matter can reveal the depth of our
love for God and of our loyalty to his arrangement.1 Consider some questions that arise on this subject.
How should we treat a disfellowshipped person? The Bible
says: “Stop keeping company with anyone called a brother
who is sexually immoral or a greedy person or an idolater
or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating
with such a man.” (1 Corinthians 5:11) Regarding everyone
who “does not remain in the teaching of the Christ,” we
read: “Do not receive him into your homes or say a greeting to him. For the one who says a greeting to him is a sharer in his wicked works.” (2 John 9-11) We do not have spiritual or social fellowship with disfellowshipped ones. The
Watchtower of September 15, 1981, page 25, stated: “A simple ‘Hello’ to someone can be the ?rst step that develops
into a conversation and maybe even a friendship. Would we
want to take that ?rst step with a disfellowshiped person?”
Is strict avoidance really necessary? Yes, for several reasons.
First, it is a matter of loyalty to God and his Word. We obey
1 Bible principles on this subject apply equally to those who disassociate themselves from the congregation.
Appendix

267

Jehovah not only when it is convenient but also when doing
so presents real challenges. Love for God moves us to obey
all his commandments, recognizing that he is just and loving and that his laws promote the greatest good. (Isaiah 48:
17; 1 John 5:3) Second, withdrawing from an unrepentant
wrongdoer protects us and the rest of the congregation from
spiritual and moral contamination and upholds the congregation’s good name. (1 Corinthians 5:6, 7) Third, our ?rm
stand for Bible principles may even bene?t the disfellowshipped one. By supporting the decision of the judicial committee, we may touch the heart of a wrongdoer who thus far
has failed to respond to the e?orts of the elders to assist
him. Losing precious fellowship with loved ones may help
him to come “to his senses,” see the seriousness of his
wrong, and take steps to return to Jehovah.—Luke 15:17.
What if a relative is disfellowshipped? In such a case, the
close bond between family members can pose a real test of
loyalty. How should we treat a disfellowshipped relative? We
cannot here cover every situation that may arise, but let us
focus on two basic ones.
In some instances, the disfellowshipped family member
may still be living in the same home as part of the immediate household. Since his being disfellowshipped does not
sever the family ties, normal day-to-day family activities and
dealings may continue. Yet, by his course, the individual has
268

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

chosen to break the spiritual bond between him and his believing family. So loyal family members can no longer have
spiritual fellowship with him. For example, if the disfellowshipped one is present, he would not participate when the
family gets together for family worship. However, if the disfellowshipped one is a minor child, the parents are still responsible to instruct and discipline him. Hence, loving parents may arrange to conduct a Bible study with the child.1
—Proverbs 6:20-22; 29:17.
In other cases, the disfellowshipped relative may be living
outside the immediate family circle and home. Although
there might be a need for limited contact on some rare occasion to care for a necessary family matter, any such contact should be kept to a minimum. Loyal Christian family
members do not look for excuses to have dealings with a disfellowshipped relative not living at home. Rather, loyalty
to Jehovah and his organization moves them to uphold
the Scriptural arrangement of disfellowshipping. Their loyal
course has the best interests of the wrongdoer at heart and
may help him to bene?t from the discipline received.2—Hebrews 12:11.
1 For more information about disfellowshipped minor children living in the home, see The Watchtower of October 1, 2001, pages 16-17,
and November 15, 1988, page 20.
2 For more information about how to treat disfellowshipped relatives, see the Scriptural counsel discussed in The Watchtower of
April 15, 1988, pages 26-31, and September 15, 1981, pages 26-31.
Appendix

269

Head Coverings—When and Why?
When and why should a Christian woman wear a head covering in connection with her worship? Let us consider the
apostle Paul’s inspired discussion of this subject. He provides
the guidance we need in order to make good decisions, ones
that honor God. (1 Corinthians 11:3-16) Paul reveals three
factors to weigh: (1) the activities that call for a woman to
wear such a covering, (2) the settings in which she should do
so, and (3) the motives for her to apply this standard.
The activities. Paul mentions two: prayer and prophesying.
(Verses 4, 5) Prayer, of course, is worshipful address to Jehovah. Today, prophesying would apply to any Bible-based
teaching that a Christian minister does. Is Paul suggesting,
though, that a woman should cover her head whenever she
prays or teaches Bible truth? No. The setting in which a woman prays or teaches makes all the di?erence.
The settings. Paul’s words suggest two settings, or spheres
of activity—the family and the congregation. He says: “The
head of a woman is the man; . . . every woman who prays or
prophesies with her head uncovered shames her head.” (Verses 3, 5) In the family arrangement, the woman’s husband is
the one whom Jehovah designates as her head. Unless she
gives due recognition to her husband’s authority, she would
shame her husband if she handled responsibilities that Jehovah assigns to him. For example, if it became necessary for
270

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

her to conduct a Bible study in her husband’s presence, she
would acknowledge his authority by wearing a head covering.
She would do so whether he is baptized or not, since he is the
head of the family.1 If she were to pray or to teach in the presence of her minor baptized son, she would likewise wear a
head covering, not because he is the head of the family, but
because of the authority granted to baptized male members
of the Christian congregation.
Paul mentions the congregation setting, saying: “If anyone
wants to argue in favor of some other custom, we have no other, nor do the congregations of God.” (Verse 16) In the Christian congregation, headship is given to baptized males. (1 Timothy 2:11-14; Hebrews 13:17) Only males are appointed as
elders and ministerial servants with the God-given responsibility to care for the ?ock of God. (Acts 20:28) Occasionally,
though, circumstances may require that a Christian woman be
called on to handle a duty normally performed by a quali?ed
baptized male. For instance, she may need to conduct a meeting for ?eld service because a quali?ed baptized male is not
available or present. Or she may conduct a prearranged home
Bible study in the presence of a baptized male.2 Because such
activities are really extensions of the Christian congregation,
1 A Christian wife would not normally pray aloud in the presence
of her believing husband except in unusual circumstances, such as if
he has been rendered mute by an illness.
2 A sister would not need to wear a head covering when conducting
a prearranged Bible study in the presence of an unbaptized male publisher who is not her husband.
Appendix

271

she would wear a head covering to acknowledge that she is
handling the duty normally assigned to a male.
On the other hand, many aspects of worship do not call for
a sister to wear a head covering. For example, she does not
need to do so when commenting at Christian meetings, engaging in the door-to-door ministry with her husband or another baptized male, or studying or praying with her unbaptized
children. Of course, other questions may arise, and if a sister
is unsure about a matter, she may do additional research.1 If
she is still unsure and if her conscience moves her to do so,
wearing a head covering would not be wrong, as shown in the
accompanying picture.
The motives. In verse 10, we ?nd two reasons why a Christian woman would want to ful?ll this requirement: “The woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of
the angels.” First, note the expression, “a sign of authority.”
Wearing a head covering is a way for a woman to show that
she acknowledges the authority that Jehovah has placed upon
baptized males in the congregation. Hence, she expresses her
love for and loyalty to Jehovah God. A second reason is found
in the words “because of the angels.” How does a woman affect those mighty spirit creatures by wearing a head covering?
The angels are interested in seeing that divine authority is
recognized throughout Jehovah’s organization, in heaven and
1 For more information, please see The Watchtower, February 15,
2015, page 30; July 15, 2002, pages 26-27; and February 15, 1977, pages 125-128.
272

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

on earth. They also bene?t from the examples of imperfect
humans in this regard. After all, they too have to be submissive to Jehovah’s arrangement—a test that more than a few
angels failed in times past. (Jude 6) Now, the angels may see
instances when a Christian woman is more experienced, more
knowledgeable, and more intelligent than a baptized male in
the congregation; yet, she readily shows her submission to his
authority. In some cases, the woman is an anointed Christian
who will later become one of Christ’s joint heirs. Such a woman will eventually serve in a position even higher than that
enjoyed by angels and rule with Christ in heaven. What a
?ne example for the angels to observe now! Really, what a
privilege all sisters have to demonstrate humble obedience
through their loyal and submissive conduct in the sight of
millions of faithful angels!

Flag Salute, Voting, and Civilian Service
Flag salute. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that bowing down
to a ?ag or saluting it, often in conjunction with an anthem,
is a religious act that ascribes salvation, not to God, but to
the State or to its leaders. (Isaiah 43:11; 1 Corinthians 10:14;
1 John 5:21) One such leader was King Nebuchadnezzar of
ancient Babylon. To impress the people with his majesty and
religious ardor, this powerful monarch erected a great image
and compelled his subjects to bow down to it while music,
like an anthem, was being played. However, three Hebrews
Appendix

273

—Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego—refused to bow to the
image, even on pain of death.—Daniel, chapter 3.
In our age, “nationalism’s chief symbol of faith and central
object of worship is the ?ag,” wrote historian Carlton Hayes.
“Men bare their heads when the ?ag passes by; and in praise
of the ?ag poets write odes and children sing hymns.” Nationalism, he added, also has its “holy days,” such as the Fourth
of July in the United States, as well as its “saints and heroes”
and its “temples,” or shrines. In a public ceremony in Brazil,
the minister general of the army acknowledged: “The ?ag is
venerated and worshiped . . . just as the Fatherland is worshiped.” Yes, “the ?ag, like the cross, is sacred,” The Encyclopedia Americana once observed.
The aforementioned encyclopedia more recently noted that
national anthems “are expressions of patriotic feeling and often include an invocation for divine guidance and protection
of the people or their rulers.” Jehovah’s servants are not being
unreasonable, therefore, when they view patriotic ceremonies
involving the ?ag salute and national anthems as religious. In
fact, when commenting on the refusal of children of Jehovah’s
Witnesses to give homage to the ?ag or to swear the oath of allegiance in U.S. schools, the book The American Character stated: “That these daily rituals are religious has been at last af?rmed by the Supreme Court in a series of cases.”
While not joining in ceremonies that they view as unscriptural, Jehovah’s people certainly respect the right of others to
274

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

do so. They also respect national ?ags as emblems and recognize duly constituted governments as “superior authorities”
serving as “God’s minister.” (Romans 13:1-4) Hence, Jehovah’s
Witnesses heed the exhortation to pray “concerning kings and
all those who are in high positions.” Our motive, though, is “so
that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with complete
godly devotion and seriousness.”—1 Timothy 2:2.
Voting in political elections. True Christians respect the right
of others to vote. They do not campaign against elections, and
they cooperate with elected authorities. However, they remain resolutely neutral with regard to the political a?airs of
the nations. (Matthew 22:21; 1 Peter 3:16) What should a
Christian do in lands where voting is compulsory or in a situation where feelings run high against those who do not go
to the voting booth? Remembering that Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego went as far as the plain of Dura, a Christian,
under similar circumstances, may decide to go to the booth
if his conscience permits. However, he will take care not to
violate his neutrality. He should take into account the following six principles:
1. Jesus’ followers are “no part of the world.”—John 15:19.
2. Christians represent Christ and his Kingdom.—John 18:
36; 2 Corinthians 5:20.
3. The Christian congregation is united in belief, and its
members are bound together by Christlike love.—1 Corinthians 1:10; Colossians 3:14.
Appendix

275

4. Those who elect a certain o?cial share responsibility for
what he does.—Note the principles behind the words recorded at 1 Samuel 8:5, 10-18 and 1 Timothy 5:22.
5. Jehovah viewed Israel’s desire for a visible ruler as a sign
that they had rejected Him.—1 Samuel 8:7.
6. Christians must have freeness of speech when speaking
to people of all political persuasions about God’s Kingdom
government.—Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20; Hebrews 10:35.
Civilian service. In some lands, the State requires that those
who reject military service engage in some form of civilian
service for a period of time. When faced with a decision on
this matter, we should pray about it, perhaps discuss it with
a mature fellow Christian, and then make our decision on the
basis of an informed conscience.—Proverbs 2:1-5; Philippians
4:5.
God’s Word tells us to “be obedient to governments and authorities, to be ready for every good work, . . . to be reasonable.” (Titus 3:1, 2) With that in mind, we might ask ourselves
the following questions: ‘Will accepting the proposed civilian
work compromise my Christian neutrality or cause me to be
involved with false religion?’ (Micah 4:3, 5; 2 Corinthians 6:
16, 17) ‘Would doing this work make it di?cult for me to ful?ll my Christian responsibilities or even prevent me from ful?lling them?’ (Matthew 28:19, 20; Ephesians 6:4; Hebrews 10:
24, 25) ‘On the other hand, would engaging in such service
involve a schedule that would allow me to expand my spiri276

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

tual activities, perhaps sharing in the full-time ministry?’
—Hebrews 6:11, 12.
If a Christian conscientiously concludes that he could perform civilian service rather than go to prison, fellow Christians should respect his decision. (Romans 14:10) If, though,
he feels that he cannot perform such service, others should
respect that position as well.—1 Corinthians 10:29; 2 Corinthians 1:24.

Blood Fractions and Surgical Procedures
Blood fractions. Fractions are derived from the four primary blood components—red cells, white cells, platelets, and
plasma. For example, red cells contain the protein hemoglobin. Products developed from human or animal hemoglobin
have been used to treat patients who have acute anemia or
massive blood loss.
Plasma—which is 90 percent water—carries scores of hormones, inorganic salts, enzymes, and nutrients, including
minerals and sugar. Plasma also carries clotting factors, antibodies to ?ght disease, and such proteins as albumin. If someone is exposed to a certain disease, doctors might prescribe
injections of gamma globulin extracted from the plasma of
people who already had immunity. White blood cells may be
a source of interferons and interleukins, used to treat some
viral infections and cancers.
Appendix

277

WHOLE BLOOD
UNACCEPTABLE

CHRISTIAN
TO DECIDE

Fractions
from
red cells

·················

Platelets

Fractions
from
white cells

Fractions
from
platelets

Plasma
·················

White Cells
·················

·················

Red Cells

Fractions
from
plasma

Should Christians accept therapies incorporating blood
fractions? The Bible does not give speci?c details, so each one
must make his own conscientious decision before God. Some
would refuse all fractions, reasoning that God’s Law to Israel
required that blood removed from a creature be poured “out
on the ground.” (Deuteronomy 12:22-24) Others, while refusing transfusions of whole blood or its major components,
might accept treatments involving a fraction. They may reason that at some point fractions that have been extracted
from blood cease to represent the life of the creature from
which the blood was taken.
When making decisions about blood fractions, consider the
following questions: Am I aware that refusing all blood fractions means that I will not accept some medications that include products to ?ght diseases or that might help the blood
to clot in order to stop bleeding? Could I explain to a physician why I reject or accept the use of one or more blood fractions?
278

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Surgical procedures. These include hemodilution and cell salvage. In hemodilution, blood is diverted from the body, replaced with a volume expander, and later returned to the patient. Cell salvage captures and returns blood lost during
surgery. Blood is recovered from a wound or a body cavity,
washed or ?ltered, and then reinfused into the patient. Because the methods of applying these techniques can vary
from physician to physician, a Christian should ?nd out what
his doctor has in mind.

SUGGESTED QUESTIONS FOR THE DOCTOR
If you face surgery or a treatment that might involve a
blood product, check that you have completed the appropriate legal documentation, such as a Health Care Proxy, which
is designed to protect you from blood transfusion. In addition, you might ask your physician the following questions:
? Do all the medical personnel involved know that as one
of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I direct that no blood transfusions
(whole blood, red cells, white cells, platelets, or blood plasma) be given to me under any circumstances?
? If a medicine containing blood fractions is recommended, what is its makeup? How much of this medicine might be
administered, and in what way?
? If my conscience permits me to accept a blood fraction,
what are the medical risks? What alternate therapies are
available?
Before deciding on any of the foregoing, express your concerns to Jehovah in prayer. He promises to give the needed
wisdom to all who “keep asking” for it in faith.—James 1:
5, 6.
Appendix

279

When making decisions about these procedures, ask yourself: ‘If some of my blood will be diverted outside my body
and the ?ow might even be interrupted for a time, will my
conscience allow me to view this blood as still part of me, thus
not requiring that it be poured “out on the ground”? (Deuteronomy 12:23, 24) Would my Bible-trained conscience be
troubled if during a medical procedure some of my own blood
was withdrawn, modi?ed, and directed back into my body?
Am I aware that refusing all medical procedures involving the
use of my own blood means that I would not accept a blood
test, hemodialysis, or a heart-lung bypass machine?’
A Christian must decide for himself how he will allow
his own blood to be handled in the course of a surgical
procedure. The same applies to medical tests and current
therapies that involve extracting a small amount of one’s own
blood, perhaps modifying it in some way, and then reinjecting it.

Gain the Victory Over Masturbation
A spiritually unhealthy habit, masturbation instills attitudes that foster self-centeredness and corrupt the mind.1 A
masturbator may also grow to view others as mere sex objects
—tools for sexual satisfaction. Sex becomes separated from
1 Masturbation is the stroking or rubbing of the genital organs, commonly resulting in orgasm.
280

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

love and is relegated to a re?ex that gives momentary pleasure and relieves sexual tension. But that relief is only temporary. In reality, instead of deadening the body’s members “as
respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, [and] uncontrolled
sexual passion,” masturbation arouses them.—Colossians 3:5.
The apostle Paul wrote: “Beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every de?lement of ?esh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Corinthians 7:1) If you are struggling to heed these words, do not give in to despair. Jehovah
is always “ready to forgive” and to help. (Psalm 86:5; Luke 11:
9-13) Indeed, your self-condemning heart and your e?orts to
give up the habit—despite occasional relapses—indicate a
good attitude. Keep in mind, too, that “God is greater than
our hearts and knows all things.” (1 John 3:20) God sees more
than our sins; he sees the whole person. This knowledge enables him to hear with sympathy our earnest pleas for mercy.
So never weary of turning to God in humble and earnest
prayer, like a child who goes to his father when in trouble. Jehovah will bless you with a cleansed conscience. (Psalm 51:112, 17; Isaiah 1:18) Of course, you need to take positive steps
in harmony with your prayers. For example, you would strive
to avoid all forms of pornography as well as bad associates.1
1 As a practical step in controlling the use of a home computer,
many families keep it in a public area. Additionally, some households
purchase software that ?lters out undesirable material. No system,
though, is completely reliable.
Appendix

281

If your problem with masturbation persists, please speak
about the matter with a Christian parent or a spiritually mature and caring friend.1—Proverbs 1:8, 9; 1 Thessalonians 5:
14; Titus 2:3-5.
1 For practical suggestions on how to overcome masturbation, see
the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Conquer This Habit?”
in the November 2006 issue of Awake!, and pages 178-182 of the book
Questions Young People Ask—Answers That Work, Volume 1.

The Bible’s View on Divorce and Separation
Jehovah expects those who are married to remain faithful
to the marriage vow. When uniting the ?rst man and woman
in marriage, Jehovah stated: “A man . . . will stick to his wife,
and they will become one ?esh.” Later, Jesus Christ repeated
that statement and added: “Therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put apart.” (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:3-6)
Hence, Jehovah and Jesus view marriage as a lifelong bond
that ends only when one partner dies. (1 Corinthians 7:39)
Since marriage is a sacred arrangement, divorce is not to be
taken lightly. In fact, Jehovah hates divorces that have no
Scriptural basis.—Malachi 2:15, 16.
What forms a Scriptural basis for divorce? Well, Jehovah
hates adultery and sexual immorality. (Genesis 39:9; 2 Samuel 11:26, 27; Psalm 51:4) Indeed, he ?nds sexual immorality so
despicable that he allows it as grounds for divorce. (For a discussion of what sexual immorality involves, refer to Chapter 9,
282

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

paragraph 7, where sexual immorality is explained.) Jehovah
grants the innocent mate the right to decide whether to remain with the guilty partner or to seek a divorce. (Matthew
19:9) Hence, if an innocent mate decides to seek a divorce,
that one does not take a step that Jehovah hates. At the same
time, however, the Christian congregation does not encourage
anyone to seek a divorce. In fact, some circumstances may
move the innocent mate to remain with the guilty one, especially if that one is genuinely repentant. In the end, though,
those who have a Scriptural basis for divorce must make their
own decision and accept whatever consequences it may bring.
—Galatians 6:5.
In certain extreme situations, some Christians have decided
to separate from or divorce a marriage mate even though that
one has not committed sexual immorality. In such a case, the
Bible stipulates that the departing one “remain unmarried or
else be reconciled with” the mate. (1 Corinthians 7:11) Such
a Christian is not free to pursue a third party with a view to
remarriage. (Matthew 5:32) Consider here a few exceptional
situations that some have viewed as a basis for separation.
Willful nonsupport. A family may become destitute, lacking
the basic essentials of life, because the husband fails to provide for them, although being able to do so. The Bible states:
“If anyone does not provide for . . . members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.” (1 Timothy 5:8) If such a man refuses to
Appendix

283

change his ways, the wife would have to decide whether she
needs to protect her welfare and that of her children by obtaining a legal separation. Of course, Christian elders should
give careful consideration to an accusation that a Christian
refuses to support his family. Refusal to care for one’s family may result in disfellowshipping.
Extreme physical abuse. An abusive spouse may act so violently that the abused mate’s health and even life are in danger. If the abusive spouse is a Christian, congregation elders
should investigate the charges. Fits of anger and a practice of
violent behavior are grounds for disfellowshipping.—Galatians 5:19-21.
Absolute endangerment of spiritual life. A spouse may constantly try to make it impossible for the mate to pursue true
worship or may even try to force that mate to break God’s
commands in some way. In such a case, the threatened mate
would have to decide whether the only way to “obey God as
ruler rather than men” is to obtain a legal separation.—Acts
5:29.
In all cases involving such extreme situations as those just
discussed, no one should put pressure on the innocent mate
either to separate or to stay with the other. While spiritually
mature friends and elders may o?er support and Bible-based
counsel, they cannot know all the details of what goes on between a husband and a wife. Only Jehovah can see that. Of
284

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

course, a Christian wife would not be honoring God or the
marriage arrangement if she exaggerated the seriousness of
her domestic problems just to live separately from her husband, or vice versa. Jehovah is aware of any scheming behind
a separation, no matter how one may try to hide it. Indeed,
“all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the
one to whom we must give an account.” (Hebrews 4:13) But
if an extremely dangerous situation persists, no one should
criticize a Christian who, as a last resort, chooses to separate.
In the ?nal analysis, “we will all stand before the judgment
seat of God.”—Romans 14:10-12.

Resolving Disputes in Business Matters
As recorded at 1 Corinthians 6:1-8, the apostle Paul discussed lawsuits between fellow believers. He expressed dismay that some Christians in Corinth would “dare to go to
court before unrighteous men.” (Verse 1) Paul gave strong
reasons why Christians should not sue one another in secular
courts but rather settle disputes within the congregation setting. Let us consider some of the reasons for this inspired
counsel and then touch on a few situations not necessarily
covered by this directive.
If we have a business dispute with a fellow believer, we
would ?rst of all seek to handle matters Jehovah’s way, not
our own. (Proverbs 14:12) As Jesus showed, it is best to settle
Appendix

285

a disagreement quickly before it escalates into a major issue.
(Matthew 5:23-26) Sadly, though, some Christians become
overly contentious, even taking disputes into secular courts.
Paul said: “It is already a defeat for you when you have lawsuits with one another.” Why? A key reason is that such proceedings may well re?ect poorly on the good name of the congregation and the God we worship. We therefore take to heart
Paul’s question: “Why not rather let yourselves be wronged?”
—Verse 7.
Paul also reasoned that God has given the congregation a
?ne arrangement for settling many disputes. The elders are
Christian men made wise by their knowledge of Scriptural
truths, and Paul says that they are “able to judge between . . .
brothers” when it comes to “matters of this life.” (Verses 3-5)
Jesus showed that disputes involving serious wrongs, such as
slander and fraud, should be settled according to a three-step
process: ?rst, endeavoring to settle the matter privately between those involved; second, if the initial step fails, bringing
along a witness or two; and third, if the preceding step fails,
taking the matter to the congregation as represented by the
elders.—Matthew 18:15-17.
Of course, Christian elders are not necessarily lawyers or
businessmen and do not need to act as such. They do not set
the terms for settling business disputes between brothers.
Rather, they seek to help all parties involved to apply the
286

“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”

Scriptures and agree on an amicable resolution. In complex
cases, they may wish to consult with the circuit overseer or
the branch o?ce of Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, there are
situations that lie outside the realm covered by Paul’s counsel. What are some of these?
In some cases, a lawsuit may be a simple formality or a legal necessity in pursuing unsel?sh and peaceful ends. For instance, a lawsuit may be the only mechanism available in
getting a divorce decree, acquiring custody of a child, determining alimony payments, obtaining insurance compensation, being listed among creditors in a bankruptcy proceeding, and probating wills. There are also cases in which a
brother might feel compelled to countersue in order to protect himself in a lawsuit.1
If such lawsuits are pursued without a spirit of contention,
they may not violate the spirit of Paul’s inspired counsel.2
Nonetheless, a Christian’s priority should be the sancti?cation of Jehovah’s name and the peace and unity of the congregation. Christ’s followers are marked ?rst and foremost by
their love, and “love . . . does not look for its own interests.”
—1 Corinthians 13:4, 5; John 13:34, 35.
1 In rare instances, one Christian might commit a serious crime
against another—such as rape, assault, murder, or major theft. In
such cases, it would not be unchristian to report the matter to the
authorities, even though doing so might result in a court case or a
criminal trial.
2 For further information, please see The Watchtower, March 15,
1997, pages 17-22, and October 15, 1991, pages 25-28.
Appendix

287

For more information, visit www.jw.org
or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.

