ORGANIZED

TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

od-E
160611

s

ORGANIZED

TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“To do your will,
O my God, is my delight.”
—Ps. 40:8.

This book issued to ___________________________________________________________________________________________________
Date ____________________________________________________________________________________

Place of baptism __________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Date ____________________________________________________________________________________

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the
modern-language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will
May 2016 Printing
English (od-E)
5 2005, 2015
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
Made in the United States of America

CONTENTS
CHAPTER
1 Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will
2 Recognizing Christ’s Role in God’s Arrangement

PAGE
6
12

3 “Remember Those Who Are Taking the Lead
Among You”

17

4 How the Congregation Is Organized and Governed

23

5 Overseers to Shepherd the Flock

29

6 Ministerial Servants Render Valuable Service

50

7 Meetings That “Incite to Love and Fine Works”

55

8 Ministers of the Good News

67

9 Methods of Preaching the Good News

81

10 Ways to Expand Your Ministry

98

11 Arrangements for Places of Worship

108

12 Supporting Kingdom Activity Locally
and Worldwide

115

13 “Do All Things for God’s Glory”

122

14 Maintaining the Peace and Cleanness
of the Congregation

132

15 Bene?ting From Theocratic Subjection

146

16 A United Brotherhood

150

17 Stay Close to Jehovah’s Organization

156

Appendix

165

Subject Index

215

Dear Fellow Publishers of the Good News:
What an amazing privilege we have to be united in the
worship of the only true God, Jehovah! We are his “fellow workers,” entrusted with the sacred and lifesaving work
of preaching and teaching the good news of his established Kingdom. (1 Cor. 3:9; Matt. 28:19, 20) To accomplish
this worldwide work in peace and unity, we must be wellorganized.—1 Cor. 14:40.
This book will help you to understand how the Christian
congregation functions today. It discusses the privileges
and responsibilities that you have as a member of the congregation. If you value your privileges and fulfill your responsibilities, you will be “made firm in the faith.”—Acts 16:
4, 5; Gal. 6:5.
Therefore, we encourage you to study this book carefully. Look for ways that you can apply the information in your
own life. For example, if you have recently become an unbaptized publisher, what steps must you take to get baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? On the other hand,
if you are baptized, what can you do to grow spiritually and

4

expand your service to Jehovah? (1 Tim. 4:15) How can you
contribute to the peace of the congregation? (2 Cor. 13:11)
Look for the answers to these questions in this book.
If you are a baptized male, what can you do to qualify
to serve as a ministerial servant and later as an elder? As
thousands of new ones continue to flock to God’s organization, there is an urgent need for qualified brothers to
take the lead. This book will help you to see what is involved in “reaching out” for these spiritual goals.—1 Tim.
3:1.
We earnestly pray that this book will help you to see your
place in Jehovah’s arrangement and to treasure it. We love
all of you very much and continue to pray that you will
be among those who eternally rejoice in worshipping our
heavenly Father, Jehovah.—Ps. 37:10, 11; Isa. 65:21-25.
Your brothers,

Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

5

CHAPTER 1

Organized
to Do Jehovah’s Will
THROUGHOUT the world, there are numerous religious, political, commercial, and social organizations with varying
characteristics, objectives, viewpoints, and philosophies.
But one organization is noticeably di?erent from all the
rest. God’s Word clearly identi?es that organization as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
2 Happily, you have become associated with Jehovah’s
organization. Having proved to yourself what God’s will is,
you are now doing it. (Ps. 143:10; Rom. 12:2) You are an
active minister serving with a loving, worldwide association
of brothers. (2 Cor. 6:4; 1 Pet. 2:17; 5:9) As promised in
God’s Word, this brings you rich blessings and much happiness. (Prov. 10:22; Mark 10:30) By faithfully doing Jehovah’s will now, you are being prepared for a lasting, glorious future.—1 Tim. 6:18, 19; 1 John 2:17.
3 Our Grand Creator has a unique worldwide organization
that is ruled theocratically. This means that it is ruled by
Jehovah, who is Head over all. We have complete con?dence in him. He is our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King.
(Isa. 33:22) Being a God of order, he has coordinated arrangements for our “working together with him” in serving the divine purpose.—2 Cor. 6:1, 2.
4 As the end of the present system of things draws ever
nearer, we move ahead under the leadership of the appointed King, Christ Jesus. (Isa. 55:4; Rev. 6:2; 11:15) It
was none other than Jesus who foretold that his followers
6

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

would do works greater than those he accomplished during his earthly ministry. (John 14:12) That would be true
because over a longer period of time and in increasing
numbers, Jesus’ followers would cover a widening territory.
They would proclaim the Kingdom good news to the ends
of the earth.—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8.
5 This has already proved to be a reality, as has been
documented in Yearbooks of Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, as Jesus clearly stated, the activity of declaring the
good news will end at Jehovah’s appointed time. All indications in God’s prophetic Word are that Jehovah’s great
and awe-inspiring day has drawn close.—Joel 2:31; Zeph.
1:14-18; 2:2, 3; 1 Pet. 4:7.
6 As we perceive what the will of Jehovah is at this late
hour, we need to intensify our e?orts in doing what God
requires. This calls for us to become well-acquainted with
the way God’s organization functions and to cooperate fully with it. The operation of the organization is based on
Scriptural principles, including the commandments, laws,
orders, regulations, and teachings set out in God’s inspired
Word.—Ps. 19:7-9.
7 When Jehovah’s people adhere to such Bible-based direction, they dwell and work together in peace and unity.
(Ps. 133:1; Isa. 60:17; Rom. 14:19) What strengthens bonds
among our brothers everywhere? Love. We are motivated
by and clothed with love. (John 13:34, 35; Col. 3:14) In this
divinely favored way, we keep pace with the heavenly part
of Jehovah’s organization.
THE HEAVENLY PART OF JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION
8

The prophets Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel saw visions of
the heavenly part of Jehovah’s organization. (Isa., chap. 6;
ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

7

Ezek., chap. 1; Dan. 7:9, 10) Likewise, the apostle John
had a vision of this heavenly arrangement and provided
us a glimpse of it in the book of Revelation. He saw Jehovah on a glorious throne accompanied by angelic creatures, who proclaim: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah God, the
Almighty, who was and who is and who is coming.” (Rev.
4:8) John also saw “standing in the midst of the throne
. . . a lamb,” the Lamb of God, Jesus Christ.—Rev. 5:6, 13,
14; John 1:29.
9 This vision of Jehovah sitting on a throne indicates that
he is the Head of this organization. Regarding him and his
superior position, 1 Chronicles 29:11, 12 states: “Yours,
O Jehovah, are the greatness and the mightiness and the
beauty and the splendor and the majesty, for everything in
the heavens and on the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O Jehovah. You are the One exalting yourself as head
over all. The riches and the glory are from you, and you
rule over everything, and in your hand there are power and
mightiness, and your hand is able to make great and to
give strength to all.”
10 As Jehovah’s fellow worker, Jesus Christ occupies an
elevated position in the heavens, and much authority has
been given to him. Indeed, God “subjected all things under his feet and made him head over all things with regard to the congregation.” (Eph. 1:22) The apostle Paul
said of Jesus: “God exalted him to a superior position
and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name, so that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bend—of those in heaven and those on earth and those
under the ground—and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God
8

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

the Father.” (Phil. 2:9-11) Thus, We need to
we can have full con?dence in intensify our e?orts
the righteous leadership of Je- in doing what God
sus Christ.
requires. This calls
11 The prophet Daniel saw in
vision the Ancient of Days on for us to become
His heavenly throne and an- well-acquainted with
gels numbering “a thousand the way God’s
thousands [who] kept minis- organization
tering to him, and ten thou- functions
sand times ten thousand
stood before him.” (Dan. 7:10)
The Bible refers to this army of angels as “spirits for holy
service, sent out to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation.” (Heb. 1:14) All these spirit creatures are
organized into ‘thrones, lordships, governments, and authorities.’—Col. 1:16.
12 When we take time to contemplate these features of
the heavenly part of Jehovah’s organization, we can understand Isaiah’s reaction to the vision in which he “saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne,” and “seraphs
were standing above him.” Isaiah stated: “Woe to me! I am
as good as dead, for I am a man of unclean lips, and I live
among a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the
King, Jehovah of armies himself!” Indeed, Isaiah was awestruck and humbled when he grasped the scope of Jehovah’s organization. He was so deeply a?ected by this experience that when a call went out from heaven regarding
a special work of proclaiming Jehovah’s judgments, Isaiah’s
reaction was: “Here I am! Send me!”—Isa. 6:1-5, 8.
13 Recognizing and appreciating Jehovah’s organization
motivates His people in a similar way. As the organization
ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

9

moves forward, we endeavor to keep up with it. We strive
to demonstrate our con?dence in Jehovah’s organization
today.
JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION
ON THE MOVE
14

In chapter 1 of Ezekiel’s prophecy, Jehovah is pictured
as riding on a colossal heavenly chariot. This resplendent
vehicle represents the invisible part of Jehovah’s organization. He rides this chariot in the sense of benevolently directing it and using it according to his purpose.—Ps.
103:20.
15 Each wheel of this chariot has a wheel inside it—one of
the same diameter that ?ts crosswise into the base wheel.
Only in this way can the wheels be said to “go in any of
the four directions.” (Ezek. 1:17) The wheels can instantly
change course. However, this chariot is not without control or intelligent supervision. Jehovah does not let his organization go in just any direction that it might be inclined
to go. Ezekiel 1:20 says: “They would go where the spirit
inclined them to go.” Thus, it is Jehovah who causes his organization to move to wherever his spirit impels it to move.
The question we must ask ourselves is, ‘Am I in step with
it?’
16 Keeping pace with Jehovah’s organization involves
more than just attending meetings and participating in the
?eld ministry. Primarily, our keeping pace has to do with
progress and spiritual growth. We “make sure of the more
important things” and stay up-to-date with the spiritual
feeding program. (Phil. 1:10; 4:8, 9; John 17:3) We must
remember, too, that where there is organization, there is
good coordination and cooperation. So we must see the
10

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

importance of making the best use of the spiritual and
material assets that Jehovah has entrusted to us in order
to accomplish his work. As we keep pace with Jehovah’s
heavenly chariot, our lives are consistent with the message
we proclaim.
17 With the help of Jehovah’s organization, we are moving forward in doing God’s will. Remember that the Rider of
this heavenly chariot is Jehovah. Therefore, keeping pace
with his chariot shows that we have respect for Jehovah
and con?dence in our Rock. (Ps. 18:31) The Bible promises: “Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will
bless his people with peace.” (Ps. 29:11) Being a part of
Jehovah’s organization today, we share in the strength that
he gives and enjoy the peace with which he blesses his
organized people. Yes, there is no question about it, rich
blessings will continue to be ours as we do Jehovah’s will
now and forever.

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

11

CHAPTER 2

Recognizing Christ’s Role
in God’s Arrangement
“IN THE beginning God created the heavens and the
earth,” and everything he made was “very good.” (Gen. 1:
1, 31) Jehovah made humans with wonderful prospects for
the future. However, the rebellion in Eden temporarily interrupted mankind’s happy state. Yet, Jehovah’s purpose
for the earth and for mankind remained unchanged. God
indicated that there would be deliverance for obedient descendants of Adam. There would be a restoration of true
worship, and God would destroy the wicked one together
with all his evil works. (Gen. 3:15) Once again, things would
be “very good.” Jehovah would accomplish this through
his Son, Jesus Christ. (1 John 3:8) Therefore, it is imperative that we recognize Christ’s role in God’s arrangement.
—Acts 4:12; Phil. 2:9, 11.
WHAT CHRIST’S ROLE IS
2

When thinking of Christ’s role in God’s arrangement, we
recognize that his role has many facets. Jesus serves as
mankind’s Redeemer, as High Priest, as Head of the Christian congregation, and now as King of God’s Kingdom.
Meditating on these roles heightens our appreciation for
God’s arrangement and deepens our love for Christ Jesus.
The Bible describes some of his varied roles.
3 During Christ’s earthly ministry, it became clear that
the reconciliation of obedient mankind to God would be accomplished through Jesus. (John 14:6) As mankind’s Redeemer, Jesus gave himself as a ransom in exchange for
12

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

many. (Matt. 20:28) So Jesus is more than just an example of godly conduct. He is the key ?gure in the outworking
of Jehovah’s purpose for mankind. He is our only means of
being restored to God’s favor. (Acts 5:31; 2 Cor. 5:18, 19)
Jesus’ sacri?cial death and his resurrection have opened
the way for obedient mankind to experience eternal blessings under the rule of God’s heavenly Kingdom.
4 As High Priest, Jesus is able to “sympathize with our
weaknesses” and make atonement for the sins of his dedicated followers here on earth. The apostle Paul explained:
“We do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with
our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tested in
all respects as we have, but without sin.” Paul then encouraged those who exercise faith in Jesus Christ to take full
advantage of this arrangement for reconciliation to God,
saying: “Let us, then, approach the throne of undeserved
kindness with freeness of speech, so that we may receive
mercy and ?nd undeserved kindness to help us at the right
time.”—Heb. 4:14-16; 1 John 2:2.
5 Jesus is also Head of the Christian congregation. As
was true of his followers in the ?rst century, we today have
no need of a human leader. Jesus gives direction through
holy spirit and through quali?ed undershepherds, who are
accountable to him and to his heavenly Father for the care
of the ?ock of God. (Heb. 13:17; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Speaking
prophetically of Jesus, Jehovah said: “Look! I made him a
witness to the nations, a leader and commander to the nations.” (Isa. 55:4) Jesus con?rmed the ful?llment of this
prophecy when he told his disciples: “Neither be called
leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ.”—Matt. 23:10.
6 As an expression of his mental attitude and willingness
to help us, Jesus extends the invitation: “Come to me, all
RECOGNIZING CHRIST’S ROLE IN GOD’S ARRANGEMENT

13

you who are toiling and load- Jesus is the key
ed down, and I will refresh you. ?gure in the
Take my yoke upon you and outworking of
learn from me, for I am mildJehovah’s purpose
tempered and lowly in heart,
and you will ?nd refreshment for mankind
for yourselves. For my yoke is
kindly, and my load is light.”
(Matt. 11:28-30) By administering the a?airs of the Christian congregation with mildness and in a way that brings
us refreshment, Jesus Christ has proved himself to be “the
?ne shepherd” in imitation of his heavenly Father, Jehovah
God.—John 10:11; Isa. 40:11.
7 In his ?rst letter to the Corinthians, Paul explained another facet of Jesus Christ’s role in these words: “He must
rule as king until God has put all enemies under his feet.
But when all things will have been subjected to him, then
the Son himself will also subject himself to the One who
subjected all things to him, that God may be all things to
everyone.” (1 Cor. 15:25, 28) Before coming to earth, Jesus
was God’s “master worker,” being the ?rst of God’s creation. (Prov. 8:22-31) When God sent Jesus to earth, he
did God’s will at all times. He endured the supreme test
and died faithful to his Father. (John 4:34; 15:10) Because
his Son was loyal even to death, God resurrected him to
heaven and gave him the right to be King of the heavenly Kingdom. (Acts 2:32-36) As such, Christ Jesus has the
awesome assignment from God to lead myriads of powerful spirit creatures in removing human rule from the earth
and ridding our globe of all wickedness. (Prov. 2:21, 22;
2 Thess. 1:6-9; Rev. 19:11-21; 20:1-3) Then God’s heaven14

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

ly Kingdom under Christ will be the only ruling authority
over the entire earth.—Rev. 11:15.
WHAT RECOGNITION OF HIS ROLE MEANS
8 Jesus Christ, our Exemplar, is perfect. He has been
commissioned to care for us. In order to bene?t from his
loving, watchful care, we need to remain loyal to Jehovah
and keep in step with Jehovah’s progressive organization.
9 Jesus’ followers in the ?rst century fully recognized the
role of Christ in God’s arrangement. They showed this by
working together in unity under the headship of Christ,
submitting themselves to his direction, as given by means
of holy spirit. (Acts 15:12-21) The apostle Paul made reference to the unity of the anointed Christian congregation
when he wrote: “Speaking the truth, let us by love grow
up in all things into him who is the head, Christ. From
him all the body is harmoniously joined together and made
to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed. When each respective member functions properly, this
contributes to the growth of the body as it builds itself up
in love.”—Eph. 4:15, 16.
10 Like the human body, the congregation of anointed
ones and the “other sheep” is made up of many di?erent members. When each member of the congregation cooperates with the others and all work in harmony under
Christ’s headship, there is growth and a warm spirit of love,
which is “a perfect bond of union.”—John 10:16; Col. 3:14;
1 Cor. 12:14-26.
11 World events in ful?llment of Bible prophecy prove beyond doubt that since 1914, Jesus Christ has been entrusted with Kingdom power. He is now ruling in the midst of
his enemies. (Ps. 2:1-12; 110:1, 2) What does this signify

RECOGNIZING CHRIST’S ROLE IN GOD’S ARRANGEMENT

15

for those now living on earth? Jesus will soon demonstrate
his role as King of kings and Lord of lords when he executes divine judgment against his enemies. (Rev. 11:15;
12:10; 19:16) Then, Jehovah’s promise of deliverance expressed at the beginning of man’s rebellion will be ful?lled
toward those at Christ’s right hand of favor. (Matt. 25:34)
How happy we are to have recognized Christ’s role in God’s
arrangement! May we remain uni?ed in accomplishing a
worldwide ministry under Christ’s leadership during these
last days.

16

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 3

“Remember Those Who Are
Taking the Lead Among You”
THESE words of the apostle Paul, recorded at Hebrews
13:7, can also be translated: “Remember those who are
governors of you.” From Pentecost 33 C.E. onward, the
faithful apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ ful?lled this role
as a governing body that took the lead in providing direction for the newly founded Christian congregation. (Acts
6:2-4) By about the year 49 C.E., this governing body
had been enlarged to include more than Jesus’ apostles.
When the circumcision issue was decided, the governing body included “the apostles and elders in Jerusalem.”
(Acts 15:1, 2) It was their responsibility to consider matters a?ecting Christians everywhere. They sent out letters
and decrees, all of which strengthened the congregations
and made it possible for the disciples to remain united in
thought and action. The congregations were obedient and
submissive to the direction of the governing body, and as
a result, they received Jehovah’s blessing and prospered.
—Acts 8:1, 14, 15; 15:22-31; 16:4, 5; Heb. 13:17.
2 After the death of the apostles, the great apostasy set
in. (2 Thess. 2:3-12) As Jesus foretold in his parable about
the wheat and the weeds, the wheat (anointed Christians)
was oversown with weeds (imitation Christians). Down
through the centuries, the groups were allowed to grow
side by side until the harvest, “a conclusion of a system of
things.” (Matt. 13:24-30, 36-43) Individual anointed Christians continued to enjoy Jesus’ favor during this time, but
there was no governing body, no clear channel on earth
“REMEMBER THOSE WHO ARE TAKING THE LEAD AMONG YOU”

17

that Jesus was using to give direction to his followers.
(Matt. 28:20) However, he foretold that a change would
occur during the harvest.
3 “Who really is the faithful and discreet slave?” With that
question, Jesus Christ introduced a parable, or illustration,
as part of “the sign” he gave regarding “the conclusion of
the system of things.” (Matt. 24:3, 42-47) Jesus indicated
that this faithful slave would be busy providing God’s people with spiritual food “at the proper time.” Just as Jesus
used a group of men—rather than an individual—to take
the lead in the ?rst century, the faithful slave that Jesus
uses during the conclusion of the system of things is not
one man.
IDENTIFYING “THE FAITHFUL AND DISCREET SLAVE”
4

Whom did Jesus appoint to feed his followers? It is only
?tting that he would use anointed Christians on earth. The
Bible refers to them as “a royal priesthood” who have been
commissioned to “ ‘declare abroad the excellencies’ of the
One who called [them] out of darkness into his wonderful light.” (1 Pet. 2:9; Mal. 2:7; Rev. 12:17) Do all anointed ones on earth make up the faithful slave? No. When
Jesus miraculously provided physical food to a crowd of
some 5,000 men, besides women and young children, he
distributed it to the disciples, the disciples in turn to the
crowds. (Matt. 14:19) He fed many through the hands of
a few. Today, he is providing spiritual food in a similar way.
5 So “the faithful steward, the discreet one,” is made up
of a small group of anointed brothers who are directly involved in preparing and dispensing spiritual food during
Christ’s presence. (Luke 12:42) Throughout the last days,
the anointed brothers who constitute “the faithful and
18

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

discreet slave” have served to- It is vital for us to be
gether at headquarters. Today, submissive to those
these anointed brothers make who keep watch
up the Governing Body of Jeover us for our
hovah’s Witnesses.
spiritual well-being
6 Christ uses this body to
publish information about the
ful?llment of Bible prophecies
and to give timely direction regarding the application of Bible principles in daily life. This spiritual food is distributed through the local congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Isa. 43:10; Gal. 6:16) In Bible times, a trusted slave, or
steward, was a house manager. Likewise, the faithful and
discreet slave has been charged with the responsibility of
managing the household of faith. So the faithful slave also
oversees material assets, the preaching activity, assembly
and convention programs, the appointment of overseers
to serve in various capacities in the organization, and the
production of Bible literature, all of which bene?t the “domestics.”—Matt. 24:45.
7 Who, then, are the “domestics”? Simply put, they are
those who are fed. Initially, all the domestics were anointed ones. Later, the domestics came to include the great
crowd of “other sheep.” (John 10:16) Both groups feed on
the spiritual food that is dispensed by the faithful slave.
8 During the great tribulation, when Jesus comes to pronounce and execute judgment on this wicked system, he
will appoint the faithful slave “over all his belongings.”
(Matt. 24:46, 47) Those who make up the faithful slave
will receive their heavenly reward. Along with the rest of
the 144,000, they will share Christ’s heavenly authority. Although there will no longer be a faithful and discreet slave
“REMEMBER THOSE WHO ARE TAKING THE LEAD AMONG YOU”

19

on earth, Jehovah and Jesus will provide direction to the
earthly subjects of the Messianic Kingdom through those
appointed to serve as “princes.”—Ps. 45:16.
WHY “REMEMBER THOSE WHO ARE TAKING THE LEAD”?
9 There are many reasons for us to “remember those who
are taking the lead” and to demonstrate our trust in them.
Why is doing this to our advantage? The apostle Paul stated: “They are keeping watch over you as those who will
render an account, so that they may do this with joy and
not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.” (Heb.
13:17) It is vital for us to be obedient and submissive to
direction from those taking the lead because they keep
watch over us for our spiritual protection and well-being.
10 As recorded at 1 Corinthians 16:14, Paul said: “Let
everything you do be done with love.” Decisions made in
behalf of God’s people are based on this superior quality
of love. Regarding love, 1 Corinthians 13:4-8 states: “Love
is patient and kind. Love is not jealous. It does not brag,
does not get pu?ed up, does not behave indecently, does
not look for its own interests, does not become provoked.
It does not keep account of the injury. It does not rejoice
over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth. It bears
all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all
things. Love never fails.” Because love is the basis of all
the decisions that are made for the bene?t of Jehovah’s
servants, we have every reason to feel secure under such
direction. Moreover, this is simply a re?ection of Jehovah’s
love.
11 As was true in the ?rst century, those whom Jehovah
is using to govern his people are imperfect men. However,
Jehovah has used imperfect humans in the past to accom-

20

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

plish his will. Noah built an ark and preached about the
coming destruction of his day. (Gen. 6:13, 14, 22; 2 Pet.
2:5) Moses was appointed to lead Jehovah’s people out of
Egypt. (Ex. 3:10) Imperfect men were inspired to write the
Bible. (2 Tim. 3:16; 2 Pet. 1:21) Jehovah’s use of imperfect men today to direct the preaching and disciple-making
work does not weaken our con?dence in God’s organization. Rather, we are strengthened because we know that
without Jehovah’s backing, the organization could never
accomplish all that it does. Through much hardship and
experience, the faithful slave has demonstrated that God’s
spirit is directing matters. Abundant blessings have been
poured out on the visible part of Jehovah’s organization
today. Therefore, we wholeheartedly give it our full support
and put our trust in it.
HOW WE DEMONSTRATE OUR TRUST
12 Those who are appointed to responsible positions in
the congregation demonstrate their trust by gladly accepting and faithfully discharging the obligations of their
appointments. (Acts 20:28) As Kingdom proclaimers, we
zealously engage in the house-to-house work, make return visits, and conduct home Bible studies. (Matt. 24:14;
28:19, 20) In order to bene?t fully from the rich spiritual food being dispensed by the faithful slave, we prepare
for and attend our Christian meetings, including assemblies and conventions. We greatly bene?t from the interchange of encouragement that takes place when we associate with our brothers at these Christian gatherings.—Heb.
10:24, 25.
13 When we support the organization with our material
contributions, we give evidence of our trust in it. (Prov. 3:

“REMEMBER THOSE WHO ARE TAKING THE LEAD AMONG YOU”

21

9, 10) When we see that our brothers are in need materially, we respond without delay. (Gal. 6:10; 1 Tim. 6:18) We
do this in a spirit of brotherly love, always on the alert for
opportunities to show Jehovah and his organization that
we appreciate the goodness bestowed on us.—John 13:35.
14 We also show that we put our trust in the organization
by supporting its decisions. This includes humbly following the direction of those who have been placed in positions of oversight, such as circuit overseers and congregation elders. These brothers are included among “those
who are taking the lead,” to whom we should be obedient and submissive. (Heb. 13:7, 17) Even if we do not fully
understand the reasons behind certain decisions, we know
that upholding them will be for our lasting good. As a result, Jehovah blesses us for our obedience to his Word and
his organization. We thus show our subjection to the Master, Jesus Christ.
15 Yes, we have every reason to put our trust in the faithful and discreet slave. Satan, the god of this system of
things, is making an all-out e?ort to bring reproach on Jehovah’s name and organization. (2 Cor. 4:4) Do not fall
prey to Satan’s wicked tactics! (2 Cor. 2:11) He knows that
he has only “a short period of time” before his abyssing,
and he is determined to turn as many of Jehovah’s people
away from God as possible. (Rev. 12:12) However, as Satan intensi?es his e?orts, may we draw ever closer to Jehovah. May we put our trust in Jehovah and in the channel that he is using to direct his people today. Our doing
so results in a united brotherhood.

22

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 4

How the Congregation
Is Organized and Governed
IN HIS ?rst letter to the Corinthians, the apostle Paul expressed an important truth about God. Paul wrote: “God
is a God not of disorder but of peace.” Then commenting further with regard to congregation meetings, he said:
“Let all things take place decently and by arrangement.”
—1 Cor. 14:33, 40.
2 At the very beginning of the same letter, the apostle gave admonition concerning dissensions that existed within the Corinthian congregation. Paul exhorted the
brothers there to “speak in agreement” and to be “completely united in the same mind and in the same line of
thought.” (1 Cor. 1:10, 11) He then gave them counsel with
regard to various matters that were a?ecting the unity of
the congregation. Using the illustration of a human body,
he showed the need for unity and cooperation. He urged
all in the Christian congregation, regardless of their role,
to care for one another in a loving way. (1 Cor. 12:12-26)
Such harmonious cooperation among the members of the
congregation implies that it would be organized.
3 But how was the Christian congregation to be organized? Who would organize it? What kind of structure
would it have? Who would serve in appointed positions?
By letting the Bible be our guide, we get clear answers to
these questions.—1 Cor. 4:6.
HOW THE CONGREGATION IS ORGANIZED AND GOVERNED

23

ORGANIZED THEOCRATICALLY
4

The Christian congregation was established on the day
of Pentecost 33 C.E. What can we learn about the congregation in the ?rst century? It was organized and governed theocratically, that is, under God (Greek, the·os1)
rule (kra1tos). These two words appear at 1 Peter 5:10, 11.
The inspired account of what took place in Jerusalem nearly 2,000 years ago leaves no doubt that the congregation
of anointed Christians was established by God. (Acts 2:
1-47) It was his building, his household. (1 Cor. 3:9; Eph.
2:19) The pattern of organization and operation that was
set during the ?rst century is followed by the Christian
congregation today.
5 The early congregation began with about 120 members.
Holy spirit was poured out on these ?rst, in ful?llment of
Joel 2:28, 29. (Acts 2:16-18) But that same day, about
3,000 others were baptized in water and brought into the
congregation of spirit-begotten ones. They had embraced
the word about the Christ and “continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles.” After that, “Jehovah
continued to add to them daily those being saved.”—Acts
2:41, 42, 47.
6 The growth of the congregation in Jerusalem was such
that the Jewish high priest complained that the disciples
had ?lled Jerusalem with their teaching. The new disciples
in Jerusalem came to include many Jewish priests who became part of the congregation.—Acts 5:27, 28; 6:7.
7 Jesus said: “You will be witnesses of me in Jerusalem,
in all Judea and Samaria, and to the most distant part of
the earth.” (Acts 1:8) And so it was that when great persecution arose in Jerusalem following the death of Stephen, the disciples living there were scattered throughout
24

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

Judea and Samaria. But wher- The pattern of
ever they went, they contin- organization and
ued declaring the good news operation that was
and making more disciples, inset during the ?rst
cluding some from among
the Samaritans. (Acts 8:1-13) century is followed
Still later, the good news was by the Christian
preached successfully among congregation today
the uncircumcised, non-Jewish
people of the nations. (Acts
10:1-48) All this preaching activity resulted in the making
of many disciples and in new congregations being formed
outside of Jerusalem.—Acts 11:19-21; 14:21-23.
8 What arrangements were made to ensure that each
newly established congregation was organized and governed God’s way—theocratically? Through the operation
of God’s spirit, provision was made for undershepherds to
care for the ?ock. In congregations that Paul and Barnabas visited during their ?rst missionary journey, they made
appointments of elders. (Acts 14:23) The Bible writer Luke
relates information about Paul’s meeting with the elders of
the congregation in Ephesus. Paul said to them: “Pay attention to yourselves and to all the ?ock, among which the
holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the
congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood
of his own Son.” (Acts 20:17, 28) They quali?ed to be elders because they met the Scriptural requirements. (1 Tim.
3:1-7) Paul’s fellow worker Titus was authorized to make
appointments of elders in the congregations of Crete.—Titus 1:5.
9 As more congregations were formed, the apostles and
elders in Jerusalem continued to serve as the principal
HOW THE CONGREGATION IS ORGANIZED AND GOVERNED

25

overseers of the expanded international Christian congregation of the ?rst century. They served as its governing
body.
10 Writing to the congregation in Ephesus, the apostle
Paul explained that by working in accord with God’s spirit, the Christian congregation could maintain unity through
adherence to the headship of Jesus Christ. The apostle
urged Christians there to cultivate humility and to maintain
“the oneness of the spirit” in peaceful association with all
members of the congregation. (Eph. 4:1-6) Then he quoted Psalm 68:18 and applied it to Jehovah’s provision for
spiritually quali?ed men to serve the needs of the congregation as apostles, prophets, evangelizers, shepherds, and
teachers. Such men, as gifts from Jehovah, would build up
the entire congregation to a spiritual fullness that would
be pleasing to God.—Eph. 4:7-16.
CONGREGATIONS TODAY FOLLOW
THE APOSTOLIC PATTERN
11 Today, a similar pattern of organization is followed in all
congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Collectively, these
form a united worldwide congregation built around the nucleus of spirit-anointed ones. (Zech. 8:23) Jesus Christ
makes this possible. True to his promise, he has loyally remained with his anointed disciples “all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” People brought
into the growing congregation embrace the good news of
God, dedicate their life unreservedly to Jehovah, and get
baptized as disciples of Jesus. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Mark 1:
14; Acts 2:41) They recognize “the ?ne shepherd,” Jesus
Christ, as Head of the entire ?ock, which is made up of the
anointed members of the congregation as well as the “oth-

26

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

er sheep.” (John 10:14, 16; Eph. 1:22, 23) That “one ?ock”
maintains its unity by loyally recognizing the headship of
Christ and by submitting to the organizational channel,
“the faithful and discreet slave,” that Christ appointed.
May we continue to put our full con?dence and trust in
this channel today.—Matt. 24:45.
THE ROLE OF RELIGIOUS CORPORATIONS
12

In order to provide spiritual food at the proper time
and to get the good news of the Kingdom preached before the end comes, certain corporations have been established. These legal entities are recognized by the laws
of various countries, and they cooperate with one another. They facilitate the preaching of the good news worldwide.
STRUCTURE OF BRANCH ORGANIZATION
13

Whenever a branch o?ce is established, a Branch
Committee of three or more elders is appointed to look after the work in the country or countries under the jurisdiction of that particular branch. One member of the committee serves as the Branch Committee coordinator.
14 Local congregations under each branch are organized
into circuits. These vary in size, depending on geographic
and language considerations as well as the number of congregations within the area assigned to the branch. A circuit overseer is appointed to serve the congregations in
each circuit. His duties are set out from time to time in
correspondence directed to circuit overseers by the branch
o?ce.
15 The congregations acknowledge organizational arrangements, which are outlined for the bene?t of all. They
HOW THE CONGREGATION IS ORGANIZED AND GOVERNED

27

accept the appointment of elders, who oversee the work
in branches, circuits, and congregations. They look to the
faithful and discreet slave for spiritual food at the proper
time. The faithful slave today, in turn, adheres strictly to
the headship of Christ, holds to Bible principles, and responds to the direction of the holy spirit. As all of us work
together in unity, we enjoy results similar to those experienced by Christians in the ?rst century: “Indeed, the congregations continued to be made ?rm in the faith and to
increase in number day by day.”—Acts 16:5.

28

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 5

Overseers
to Shepherd the Flock
DURING his earthly ministry, Jesus proved himself to be
“the ?ne shepherd.” (John 10:11) On viewing the crowds
who eagerly followed him, “he felt pity for them, because
they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without
a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:36) Peter and the other apostles
took note of his loving concern. How di?erent Jesus was
from the false shepherds of Israel, who neglected the ?ock
so much that the sheep were scattered and spiritually
starved! (Ezek. 34:7, 8) Jesus’ ?ne example of teaching
and caring for the sheep, even to the point of laying down
his life for them, taught the apostles how to help those
with faith to return to Jehovah, “the shepherd and overseer of [their] souls.”—1 Pet. 2:25.
2 When speaking to Peter on one occasion, Jesus emphasized the importance of feeding and shepherding the
sheep. (John 21:15-17) Peter was no doubt deeply moved
by this and later admonished the elders in the early Christian congregation: “Shepherd the ?ock of God under your
care, serving as overseers, not under compulsion, but willingly before God; not for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly; not lording it over those who are God’s inheritance,
but becoming examples to the ?ock.” (1 Pet. 5:1-3) Peter’s
words also apply to overseers in the congregation today.
In imitation of Jesus, elders serve willingly and eagerly as
examples to the ?ock, taking the lead in Jehovah’s service.
—Heb. 13:7.
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

29

3

We can be grateful for the spirit-appointed overseers in
the congregation. The bene?ts we receive from their care
are many. For example, overseers give encouragement and
personal attention to members of the congregation. Each
week, they preside diligently at congregation meetings,
where all in the faith are nourished. (Rom. 12:8) Their efforts to protect the ?ock from harmful elements, such as
wicked men, contribute to our security. (Isa. 32:2; Titus 1:
9-11) Their lead in the ?eld ministry encourages us to keep
active in preaching the good news regularly each month.
(Heb. 13:15-17) Through these “gifts in men,” Jehovah has
provided for the building up of the congregation.—Eph. 4:
8, 11, 12.
QUALIFICATIONS FOR OVERSEERS
4

To make sure that the congregation is cared for properly, men appointed to serve as overseers must meet the requirements set out in God’s Word. Only if they qualify can
it be said that they are appointed by holy spirit. (Acts 20:
28) Admittedly, the Scriptural standards for Christian overseers are high, since being an overseer is a serious responsibility. But the standards are not so high that they cannot
be met by Christian men who have real love for Jehovah
and are willing to be used by him. It should be obvious to
all that the overseers are individuals who apply Bible counsel in the everyday a?airs of life.
5 The apostle Paul listed the basic Scriptural requirements for overseers in his ?rst letter to Timothy and in his
letter to Titus. At 1 Timothy 3:1-7, we read: “If a man is
reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a ?ne
work. The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a
husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind,
30

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

orderly, hospitable, quali?ed to In imitation of
teach, not a drunkard, not vio- Jesus, elders serve
lent, but reasonable, not quar- willingly and eagerly
relsome, not a lover of money,
as examples to the
a man presiding over his own
household in a ?ne manner, ?ock, taking the
having his children in subjec- lead in Jehovah’s
tion with all seriousness (for if service
any man does not know how
to preside over his own household, how will he care for the congregation of God?), not a
newly converted man, for fear that he might get pu?ed up
with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil. Moreover, he should also have a ?ne testimony from outsiders so that he does not fall into reproach and a snare
of the Devil.”
6 Paul wrote to Titus: “I left you in Crete so that you
would correct the things that were defective and make appointments of elders in city after city, as I instructed you:
if there is any man free from accusation, a husband of
one wife, having believing children who are not accused
of debauchery or rebelliousness. For as God’s steward, an
overseer must be free from accusation, not self-willed, not
quick-tempered, not a drunkard, not violent, not greedy of
dishonest gain, but hospitable, a lover of goodness, sound
in mind, righteous, loyal, self-controlled, holding ?rmly to
the faithful word as respects his art of teaching, so that
he may be able both to encourage by the teaching that is
wholesome and to reprove those who contradict.”—Titus
1:5-9.
7 Although the Scriptural requirements for overseers may
at ?rst seem overwhelming, Christian men should not hold
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

31

back from reaching out. When they manifest the ?ne Christian qualities required of overseers, they encourage other
members of the congregation to do the same. Paul wrote
that such “gifts in men” are provided “with a view to the
readjustment of the holy ones, for ministerial work, to build
up the body of the Christ, until we all attain to the oneness of the faith and of the accurate knowledge of the Son
of God, to being a full-grown man, attaining the measure
of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.”—Eph.
4:8, 12, 13.
8 Overseers are not mere boys or newly converted men.
Rather, they are individuals with experience in Christian living, having a broad knowledge of the Bible, a deep understanding of the Scriptures, and a genuine love for the
congregation. They have the courage to speak up and correct wrongdoers, thus protecting the sheep from any who
would sel?shly exploit them. (Isa. 32:2) The overseers are
readily recognized by all in the congregation as spiritually
mature men, having genuine concern for the ?ock of God.
9 Those qualifying for appointment as overseers demonstrate practical wisdom in their lives. If married, an
overseer would be adhering to the Christian standard for
marriage, namely, being the husband of one wife and presiding over his own household in a fine manner. If the
overseer has believing children who are in subjection with
all seriousness and are not accused of debauchery or rebelliousness, other members of the congregation can con?dently approach him for counsel and advice on family life
and Christian living. The overseer is also irreprehensible
and free from accusation and has a fine testimony even
from outsiders. No valid charge of improper conduct can
be brought against him to mar the reputation of the con32

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

gregation. He would not recently have been reproved for
serious wrongdoing. Others in the congregation are moved
to imitate his ?ne example and are happy to entrust their
spiritual life to his care.—1 Cor. 11:1; 16:15, 16.
10 Such quali?ed men are able to serve the Christian congregation in a role similar to that of the elders of Israel
who were described as “wise, discreet, and experienced.”
(Deut. 1:13) Christian elders are not without sin, but they
are known in the congregation and in the community as
upright and God-fearing men who have demonstrated over
a period of time that they conduct their lives in harmony
with godly principles. Their blamelessness gives them freeness of speech before the congregation.—Rom. 3:23.
11 Men qualifying for appointment as overseers show
moderation in personal habits and in their dealings with
others. They are not fanatics. Instead, their way of life is
characterized by balance and self-control. Their moderation is demonstrated in such things as eating, drinking,
recreation, hobbies, and entertainment. They are moderate in the use of alcoholic beverages so as not to leave
themselves open to charges of drunkenness or of being a
drunkard. One whose senses have been dulled by intoxicating drink easily loses self-control and is not in a position to watch over the spiritual interests of the congregation.
12 Exercising oversight of the congregation requires that
a man have a measure of orderliness. His good habits are
re?ected in his personal appearance, his home, and his
everyday activities. Such a man avoids procrastination; he
sees what is required and plans accordingly. He adheres to
godly principles.
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

33

13

An overseer must be reasonable. He must be able to
work in unity with others within the body of elders and cooperate with them. He should have a proper view of himself and not be overly demanding of others. As a reasonable person, the overseer is not opinionated, considering
his views to be superior to those of his fellow elders. Others may excel in qualities or abilities that he may lack. An
elder shows reasonableness when he bases his conclusions
solidly on the Scriptures and strives to imitate the example of Jesus Christ. (Phil. 2:2-8) An elder is not quarrelsome or violent but shows proper respect for others, considering them to be superior. He is not self-willed, always
insisting that his way or his point of view be accepted. He
is not quick-tempered, but he is peaceable in his dealings
with others.
14 Similarly, one qualifying to serve as an overseer in the
congregation is sound in mind. This means that he is levelheaded, not hasty in judgment. He has a good comprehension of Jehovah’s principles and their application. Someone
who is sound in mind is receptive to counsel and direction.
He is not hypocritical.
15 Paul reminded Titus that an overseer is a lover of
goodness. He should be righteous and loyal. These qualities are re?ected in his dealings with others and in his ?rm
stand for what is right and good. He is unwavering in his
devotion to Jehovah and is consistent in upholding righteous principles. He can keep a con?dence. He is also genuinely hospitable, freely giving of himself and his belongings for the bene?t of others.—Acts 20:33-35.
16 In order to serve e?ectively, an overseer needs to be
qualified to teach. According to Paul’s words to Titus, the
34

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

overseer would be “holding ?rmly to the faithful word as
respects his art of teaching, so that he may be able both
to encourage by the teaching that is wholesome and to reprove those who contradict.” (Titus 1:9) He is able to use
reasoning, produce evidence, overcome objections, and
apply the Scriptures in such a way that others are convinced and have their faith strengthened. The overseer exercises such teaching ability in favorable times as well as
in di?cult times. (2 Tim. 4:2) He has the patience needed
to reprove with mildness one who is in error or to convince
a doubter and motivate him to do good works on the basis of faith. Being quali?ed to teach either before an audience or on a one-on-one basis gives evidence that the
overseer meets this important requirement.
17 It is important for elders to have a zealous share in the
ministry. It should be apparent that also in this way they
are striving to imitate Jesus, who considered the preaching
of the good news to be a priority. Jesus took an interest
in his disciples, helping them to be e?ective evangelizers.
(Mark 1:38; Luke 8:1) The elders’ determination to spend
time in the ministry despite their busy schedule stimulates
the entire congregation to have similar zeal. And when the
elders preach along with members of their own family as
well as others in the congregation, “an interchange of encouragement” results.—Rom. 1:11, 12.
18 All of this may seem to be a great deal to expect of
one who serves as an overseer. Certainly no overseer could
measure up perfectly to the high standard set forth in
the Bible, but none of the appointed elders in the congregation should be so signi?cantly lacking in any one of
these qualities that the de?ciency could be considered a
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

35

serious ?aw. Some elders may To make sure that
have certain outstanding qual- the congregation is
ities, whereas others may ex- cared for properly,
cel in di?erent areas. The remen appointed to
sult is that the body of elders
serve as overseers
as a whole will have all the ?ne
qualities that are necessary must meet the
for exercising proper oversight requirements set
out in God’s Word
of the congregation of God.
19 When the elders as a body
recommend men for appointment as overseers, they will want to keep in mind the apostle Paul’s words: “I tell everyone there among you not to
think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to
think so as to have a sound mind, each one as God has
given to him a measure of faith.” (Rom. 12:3) Each elder
should consider himself a lesser one. No one should prove
to be “overly righteous” when examining the quali?cations
of another. (Eccl. 7:16) Having clearly in mind the Scriptural
requirements for overseers, the body of elders would want
to determine whether a brother being considered measures
up to those standards to a reasonable degree. Allowing
for human imperfections and being free of biased leanings
and hypocrisy, elders will make their recommendations in
a manner that shows due respect for Jehovah’s righteous
standards and is for the good of the congregation. They
will give prayerful consideration to each recommendation
and follow the direction of God’s holy spirit. This is one of
the serious responsibilities they shoulder, and they must do
so in accord with Paul’s admonition: “Never lay your hands
hastily on any man.”—1 Tim. 5:21, 22.
36

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

FRUITAGE OF THE SPIRIT
20

Spiritually quali?ed men give evidence that they are directed by holy spirit, and they manifest its fruitage in their
life. Paul lists the nine aspects of the fruitage of the spirit as “love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,
mildness, self-control.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) Such overseers are
refreshing to the brothers and help to unite the congregation in rendering sacred service. Their course of conduct
and the fruits of their labors show that they are appointed by holy spirit.—Acts 20:28.
MEN WHO PROMOTE UNITY
21 It is vital that elders work together to promote unity in
the congregation. They may have very di?erent personalities, but they preserve the unity of the body by listening respectfully to one another, even though they may not agree
on every matter they discuss. As long as no Bible principle is being violated, each should be willing to yield and
to support the ?nal decision of the body of elders. Having a yielding spirit shows that one is guided by “the wisdom from above,” which is “peaceable, reasonable.” (Jas.
3:17, 18) No elder should think that he is above the others,
and no elder should try to dominate the others. Elders are
really cooperating with Jehovah when they cooperate as a
body for the good of the congregation.—1 Cor., chap. 12;
Col. 2:19.

REACHING OUT
22

Mature Christian men should desire to become overseers. (1 Tim. 3:1) However, serving as an elder requires
work and self-sacri?ce. It means making oneself available
to serve the needs of the brothers, caring for their spiritual
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

37

interests. Reaching out to become an overseer means
striving to meet the quali?cations set out in the Scriptures.
PERSONAL CIRCUMSTANCES MAY CHANGE
23 A brother who has served faithfully for a long time may
become physically ill or otherwise incapacitated. Perhaps
because of advanced age, he may no longer be able to
care for the responsibilities of an overseer. Even so, he
should still be respected and viewed as an elder as long
as he is appointed. There would be no need for him to step
aside on account of his limitations. He is still worthy of the
double honor given to all hardworking elders who are serving to the best of their abilities in shepherding the ?ock.
24 But if a brother should feel that it would be best for
him to step aside because of changed personal circumstances that limit his ability to serve, he may choose to do
so. (1 Pet. 5:2) He should still be respected. He is able to
do much good in the congregation, even though he no longer has assignments and duties given to elders.

POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE CONGREGATION
25

Elders care for a variety of responsibilities in the congregation. There is a coordinator of the body of elders, a
secretary, a service overseer, a Watchtower Study conductor, and a Life and Ministry Meeting overseer. Most elders,
if not all, serve as group overseers. The elders serve in
these positions for an inde?nite period of time. Of course,
if a brother moves, is unable to care for his responsibilities for health reasons, or becomes disquali?ed for failure
to measure up to the Scriptural requirements, another elder is selected to handle the assignment. In congregations
where the number of overseers is limited, it may be nec38

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

essary for an elder to handle more than one assignment
until other brothers qualify to be appointed as elders.
26 The coordinator of the body of elders serves as chairman at meetings of the body of elders. As such, he humbly works along with the other elders in caring for the ?ock
of God. (Rom. 12:10; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3) He should be a good organizer and able to preside diligently. (Rom. 12:8) He also
arranges for public talks, at times having another elder or
a well-quali?ed ministerial servant assist him if needed.
27 The secretary handles congregation records and keeps
the elders informed of important communications. If necessary, another elder or a capable ministerial servant may
be assigned to assist in caring for some routine matters.
28 Arrangements for ?eld service activity and other
service-related matters come under the direction of the
service overseer. This includes overseeing arrangements
for group witnessing. He schedules regular visits to all ?eld
service groups so that one weekend each month, he visits
a di?erent group. In smaller congregations where there are
only a few service groups, he may visit each group twice
a year. During his visit, he will conduct the meetings for
?eld service, work with the group in the ministry, and assist publishers with their return visits and Bible studies.
GROUP OVERSEERS
29

One of the outstanding privileges in the congregation
is that of serving as a group overseer. His responsibilities include (1) taking an active interest in the spirituality of each person in the ?eld service group; (2) helping
each one in the group to have a regular, meaningful, and
joyful share in the ministry; and (3) assisting and training
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

39

ministerial servants in the group to reach out and qualify
for congregation responsibilities. The body of elders determines which brothers are most quali?ed to ful?ll all these
aspects of the assignment.
30 Because of the nature of the assignment, group overseers should, if possible, be elders. Or a capable ministerial servant can serve until an elder can take over. A ministerial servant working in this capacity is called a group
servant, as he does not function as an overseer in the congregation. Rather, he works under the direction of the elders in caring for his responsibility.
31 An important feature of the group overseer’s work is
that of taking the lead in the ?eld ministry. The regularity,
zeal, and enthusiasm that he shows will encourage those
in his group. Because the publishers appreciate the encouragement and help that come from being together, it
would be good to have a group witnessing schedule convenient for the majority. (Luke 10:1-16) The overseer needs
to make sure that there is always enough territory. He will
generally conduct the meeting for ?eld service and organize the publishers for that day’s activity. When he cannot
be there, he should arrange for another elder, a ministerial servant or, if neither is available, a quali?ed publisher to
care for these responsibilities so that the publishers have
the direction they need.
32 The group overseer should plan ahead for the visit of
the service overseer, informing his group of the visit and
building anticipation for its bene?ts. When all in the group
are kept fully aware of the arrangement, they can enthusiastically support it.
33 Each service group is purposely kept small. This allows the group overseer to become well-acquainted with
40

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

all assigned to it. As a loving shepherd, he is keenly interested in each one. He tries to give personal help and
encouragement for the ?eld ministry and for the support
of congregation meetings. He also endeavors to do whatever else is appropriate to help each person keep spiritually strong. Those who become ill or depressed will bene?t
from a personal visit. An encouraging suggestion or a word
of counsel might prompt some to reach out for additional
privileges in the congregation and thus be of greater assistance to their brothers. Most of the group overseer’s efforts will logically be directed toward helping those in his
own group. However, as an elder and a shepherd, he is lovingly concerned about all in the congregation and is ready
to help any who are in need.—Acts 20:17, 28.
34 One responsibility of the group overseer is to assist
in collecting ?eld service reports from those in his service
group. These reports are forwarded to the secretary. Individual publishers can assist the group overseer by turning
in their ?eld service reports promptly. This can be done by
handing their reports directly to the group overseer at the
end of each month or by placing them in the box designated for ?eld service reports at the Kingdom Hall.
CONGREGATION SERVICE COMMITTEE
35 There are certain duties that are cared for by the Congregation Service Committee, which is made up of
the coordinator of the body of elders, the secretary, and
the service overseer. Members of this committee are involved in handling various forms, such as literature requests, ?eld service reports, and recommendations for appointment or removal of elders and ministerial servants.
In addition, the service committee approves the use of

OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

41

the Kingdom Hall for weddings As we continue
and funerals and is responsi- submitting
ble for assigning publishers to ourselves to
?eld service groups. The com- overseers charged
mittee also approves applica- with shepherding
tions for regular and auxiliary
the ?ock, we are
pioneering and other avenues
drawn into unity
of service. From time to time,
the branch o?ce calls on the with the Head of
service committee to perform the congregation,
other duties. The service com- Christ Jesus
mittee works under the direction of the body of elders.
36 The speci?c duties of these brothers—along with those
of the Watchtower Study conductor, the Life and Ministry
Meeting overseer, and others who make up the body of
elders—are from time to time set out in letters from the
branch o?ce.
37 The body of elders in each congregation meets periodically to discuss matters related to the spiritual progress of the congregation. Two such meetings are held each
year in conjunction with the regular visits of the circuit
overseer. An additional meeting should be scheduled about
three months after each visit of the circuit overseer. These
four meetings during the year are most likely su?cient for
resolving any matters requiring the attention of the entire
body of elders. Of course, the elders may convene at any
time that circumstances make it advisable. But if each elder gives proper attention to his assigned duties and if the
work of the elders is being adequately directed through the
42

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

coordinator of the body of elders, meetings can be kept to
a minimum.
BE SUBMISSIVE
38

The overseers are imperfect men; yet all in the congregation are urged to be submissive to them because it is Jehovah’s arrangement. He will hold the overseers accountable for their actions. They are representing him and his
theocratic rule. Hebrews 13:17 says: “Be obedient to those
who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for
they are keeping watch over you as those who will render
an account, so that they may do this with joy and not with
sighing, for this would be damaging to you.” Just as Jehovah uses holy spirit to appoint a man, Jehovah will use
that same holy spirit to remove a man from serving as an
overseer if he fails to manifest the fruitage of the spirit and
his pattern of life falls short of the Scriptural requirements.
39 Do we not truly appreciate the hard work and ?ne example of the congregation overseers? In writing to the congregation in Thessalonica, Paul urged the brothers: “We request you, brothers, to show respect for those who are
working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord
and admonishing you; and to give them extraordinary consideration in love because of their work.” (1 Thess. 5:12, 13)
Much of the hard work of the congregation overseers makes
our service to God easier and more enjoyable. Also, in his
?rst letter to Timothy, Paul makes mention of the attitude
that members of the congregation should cultivate toward
the overseers, saying: “Let the elders who preside in a ?ne
way be considered worthy of double honor, especially those
who work hard in speaking and teaching.”—1 Tim. 5:17.
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

43

OTHER POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY
IN THE ORGANIZATION
40 At times, selected elders are appointed to serve as
members of Patient Visitation Groups. Others serve on
Hospital Liaison Committees and visit hospitals and doctors to encourage continued and expanded treatment of
Jehovah’s Witnesses without using blood. Other overseers
are able to advance Kingdom interests by helping to build
and maintain Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls or by
serving as members of Convention Committees. The hard
work of these brothers and their willingness to expend
themselves in this way are very much appreciated by all
in the organization. Indeed, we “keep holding men of that
sort dear.”—Phil. 2:29.

CIRCUIT OVERSEER
41 The Governing Body arranges for the appointment of
quali?ed elders to serve as circuit overseers. These are
assigned by the branch o?ce to visit the congregations
that make up their circuits, usually twice a year. They also
periodically visit pioneers in isolated territories. They plan
their routing and notify each congregation su?ciently in
advance so that the visit will result in the most bene?t.
42 The coordinator of the body of elders takes the lead
in organizing matters so that the visit will prove spiritually refreshing to all. (Rom. 1:11, 12) On receiving noti?cation of the visit and information about the personal needs
of the circuit overseer and (if married) his wife, the coordinator of the body of elders through various brothers
will make arrangements for accommodations and other
necessary things. He makes sure that all, including the circuit overseer, are informed of these arrangements.

44

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

43

The circuit overseer will contact the coordinator of the
body of elders regarding the scheduling of meetings, including meetings for ?eld service. These will be arranged
in accord with the circuit overseer’s suggestions and letters from the branch o?ce. All need to be informed in advance concerning the time and place of the meetings with
the congregation, with the pioneers, and with the elders
and ministerial servants, as well as the time and place of
the meetings for ?eld service.
44 On Tuesday afternoon, the circuit overseer examines
the Congregation’s Publisher Record cards, meeting attendance records, territory records, and the accounts. This will
give him some insight into possible needs of the congregation and how he may be of assistance to those responsible
for keeping these records. The coordinator of the body of
elders should make arrangements for the circuit overseer to
receive the records in advance. Sometime before the Tuesday evening meeting, the circuit overseer meets with the
coordinator or another local elder to discuss any questions
he has as a result of reviewing the records.
45 During his visit, the circuit overseer takes time to
speak with the brothers individually as he is able—at meetings, in ?eld service, at mealtimes, and at other times.
Additionally, he meets with the elders and ministerial servants, sharing appropriate Scriptural counsel, suggestions,
and encouragement that will help them shoulder their responsibilities to shepherd the ?ock in their care. (Prov. 27:
23; Acts 20:26-32; 1 Tim. 4:11-16) He also meets with the
pioneers to encourage them in their work and to give personal assistance regarding any problems they may be having in the ministry.
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

45

46

If there are other matters that need attention, the circuit overseer will assist to the extent possible during the
week. For example, if there has been some serious wrongdoing and the elders need his assistance in handling such,
he will set aside time for this purpose. If they cannot ?nish
the matter during the week, he can help the elders or individuals involved to do research on the Scriptural direction
that applies. If the branch o?ce needs to do any followup, he and the elders will provide the branch with a detailed report on the matter.
47 While visiting the congregation, the circuit overseer attends the regular congregation meetings. These may be
adjusted from time to time in harmony with directions from
the branch o?ce. He will give several talks designed to encourage, motivate, instruct, and fortify the congregation.
He strives to engender love for Jehovah, Jesus Christ, and
the organization.
48 One of the objectives of the circuit overseer’s visit is
to encourage zealous participation in the ministry and provide practical suggestions. Many in the congregation may
be able to adjust their schedule so that they can have a
full share in ?eld service that week, perhaps by arranging
to auxiliary pioneer during the month of his visit. Any who
desire to work with him or his wife can make an appointment. Much good can be accomplished by taking the circuit overseer or his wife on Bible studies and return visits.
Your extra e?ort to give full support to this aspect of the
week’s visit is deeply appreciated.—Prov. 27:17.
49 Every year, two circuit assemblies are arranged for
each circuit. The circuit overseer is responsible for the operation of the assembly organization on these occasions.
46

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

The circuit overseer appoints an assembly overseer and
an assistant assembly overseer. They are to work closely with him in caring for the assembly organization. This
will enable the circuit overseer to give his primary attention
to the assembly program. The circuit overseer also designates other capable men to care for various departments.
He also arranges for an audit of the circuit accounts after
each assembly. One circuit assembly a year will be served
by a brother from the branch o?ce who will be a visiting
speaker. Because of distances involved or because the assembly facilities are small, some circuits are divided into
sections with a circuit assembly held for each section.
50 The circuit overseer submits his ?eld service report directly to the branch o?ce at the end of each month. If
certain modest expenses are incurred—such as for travel, food, lodging, and other necessary items required to
carry out his work—and they have not been covered by
the congregation that he is serving, he may submit these
to the branch o?ce. Traveling representatives have con?dence that if they put the interests of Jehovah’s Kingdom
?rst, material needs will be cared for, as Jesus promised.
(Luke 12:31) The congregations will want to be conscious
of their privilege to show hospitality to these devoted elders who serve them.—3 John 5-8.
BRANCH COMMITTEE
51

In each branch o?ce of Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the world, three or more spiritually quali?ed, mature
brothers serve as a Branch Committee that oversees the
preaching work in the country or countries under its jurisdiction. One of the committee members serves as the
Branch Committee coordinator.
OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

47

52

Those serving on the Branch Committee handle matters pertaining to all the congregations in the branch territory. They arrange for the distribution of publications
furnished by Jehovah’s organization to strengthen all associated with the congregations. The committee oversees
the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom throughout
the branch territory and ensures that congregations and
circuits are set up to give proper oversight to the needs of
the ?eld. The Branch Committee also gives attention to the
missionary ?eld and to special, regular, and auxiliary pioneer activity. When there are assemblies and conventions,
the committee makes arrangements and assignments so
that “all things take place decently and by arrangement.”
—1 Cor. 14:40.
53 A Country Committee is appointed in some lands that
come under the oversight of a Branch Committee in another land. This allows for closer supervision of the work where
the Country Committee serves. It cares for matters in the
Bethel Home and o?ce, handles correspondence and reports, and generally cares for the activities in the ?eld.
The Country Committee cooperates with the Branch Committee for the advancement of Kingdom interests.
54 The Governing Body makes all appointments of those
who serve on Branch Committees and Country Committees.
HEADQUARTERS REPRESENTATIVES
55

Periodically, arrangements are made by the Governing
Body to have quali?ed brothers visit each of the branches throughout the earth. A brother serving in this capacity is known as a headquarters representative. His primary work is to encourage the Bethel family and to help the
48

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

Branch Committee with problems or questions that may
arise in carrying out the preaching and disciple-making
work. Wherever practical, this brother also meets with selected traveling overseers and with the ?eld missionaries
who work under the branch he visits. He talks with them
about their problems and needs, giving necessary encouragement regarding their most important activity, Kingdom
preaching and disciple making.
56 The headquarters representative is very interested
in what is being accomplished in the ?eld as far as the
Kingdom-preaching and other congregation activities are
concerned. As time allows, he may also visit remote translation o?ces. When the headquarters representative visits a branch, he also shares to the extent possible in the
Kingdom-preaching work.
LOVING OVERSIGHT
57

We bene?t greatly from the hard work and loving care
of mature Christian men. As we continue submitting ourselves to appointed overseers charged with shepherding
the ?ock, we are drawn into unity with the Head of the congregation, Christ Jesus. (1 Cor. 16:15-18; Eph. 1:22, 23) As
a result, God’s spirit permeates the congregations worldwide, and God’s Word serves to guide the work throughout the earth.—Ps. 119:105.

OVERSEERS TO SHEPHERD THE FLOCK

49

CHAPTER 6

Ministerial Servants
Render Valuable Service
TO THE congregation in Philippi, the apostle Paul wrote:
“Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy
ones in union with Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, along
with overseers and ministerial servants.” (Phil. 1:1) Note
that he greeted the ministerial servants. These men evidently played an important role in assisting the elders in
the congregation back then. The same is true in our day.
Ministerial servants render services that help the overseers
and that contribute to the good order of the congregation.
2 Do you know who the ministerial servants are in your
congregation? Are you aware of the work they do for your
bene?t and for the bene?t of the entire congregation? The
e?orts of such men are certainly appreciated by Jehovah.
Paul wrote: “The men who minister in a ?ne manner are
acquiring for themselves a ?ne standing and great freeness of speech in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.”—1 Tim.
3:13.
SCRIPTURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MINISTERIAL SERVANTS
3

Ministerial servants are expected to lead a wholesome
Christian life, to be responsible men, and to care for assignments properly. This becomes obvious when we consider what Paul had to say about their quali?cations in his
letter to Timothy: “Ministerial servants should likewise be
serious, not double-tongued, not indulging in a lot of wine,
not greedy of dishonest gain, holding the sacred secret of
the faith with a clean conscience. Also, let these be test50

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

ed as to ?tness ?rst; then let them serve as ministers, as
they are free from accusation. Let ministerial servants be
husbands of one wife, presiding in a ?ne manner over their
children and their own households.” (1 Tim. 3:8-10, 12)
Holding to the high standard set for ministerial servants
protects the congregation against accusations raised concerning the kind of men to whom special responsibilities
are entrusted.
4 Whether younger or older, ministerial servants are active in the ministry each month. In imitation of Jesus, they
demonstrate zeal for the ministry. By such zeal, they re?ect Jehovah’s interest in the salvation of mankind.—Isa.
9:7.
5 Men who serve as ministerial servants are also exemplary in their dress, grooming, speech, attitude, and
conduct. They are sound in mind, which earns them the
respect of others. In addition, they take seriously their relationship with Jehovah and their privileges of service in
the congregation.—Titus 2:2, 6-8.
6 These men have been “tested as to ?tness.” Even before receiving their appointment, they proved to be truly dedicated men. They have demonstrated that they put
Kingdom interests ?rst in their life and are reaching out for
whatever service privileges may be open to them. They are
indeed examples for others in the congregation to imitate.
—1 Tim. 3:10.
HOW THEY SERVE
7

Ministerial servants render a variety of practical services in behalf of their brothers and sisters, thus allowing the overseers to spend more time caring for teaching and shepherding responsibilities. When giving them
MINISTERIAL SERVANTS RENDER VALUABLE SERVICE

51

assignments, the body of el- Ministerial servants
ders takes into account their render a variety of
individual abilities and the practical services,
needs of the congregation.
thus allowing the
8 Just consider some
of
these services: One ministeri- overseers to spend
al servant may be assigned to more time caring
care for the literature so that for teaching and
we can obtain it for personal shepherding
use and for the ?eld ministry. responsibilities
Another may care for the magazines. Others are assigned to
keep congregation accounts or territory records. Some are
assigned to handle microphones, to operate sound equipment, to serve as attendants, and to help the elders in other ways. There is much work to be done in maintaining the
Kingdom Hall and keeping it clean, so ministerial servants
are often called on to assist in caring for these responsibilities.
9 In some congregations, it may be possible to assign a
di?erent ministerial servant to each of these duties. Elsewhere, a ministerial servant may care for several assignments. In some instances, more than one ministerial servant may care for a certain task. If there are not enough
ministerial servants to care for some of these responsibilities, the body of elders may arrange for other exemplary
baptized brothers to do this necessary work. Thus they will
gain experience that will be useful later when they become
quali?ed to be appointed as ministerial servants. If brothers are not available, an exemplary sister could be asked
to assist with some things, even though she would not, of
course, be appointed as a ministerial servant. An individ52

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

ual who is exemplary is someone whose conduct and worship are considered worthy of imitation. His or her meeting attendance, share in the ministry, family life, choices of
entertainment, dress and grooming, and so forth are good
examples for others.
10 In congregations that have very few elders, capable
ministerial servants may be called on to review with individuals the questions for baptism dealing with doctrinal
matters. These are found in the Appendix “Part 1—Elementary Bible Teachings” and “Part 3—Jehovah’s Arrangement
of Things.” Since “Part 2—Jehovah’s Righteous Requirements” involves sensitive personal matters, an elder should
consider this section.
11 If there is good reason, the body of elders may ?nd it
bene?cial periodically to change some assignments from
one ministerial servant to another. However, there is great
advantage in having brothers handle the same assignments for some time in order for them to gain experience
and pro?ciency.
12 Depending on local circumstances, there may be other responsibilities that can be assigned to ministerial servants whose advancement is “plainly seen by all people.”
(1 Tim. 4:15) If there are not enough elders, a ministerial servant may be assigned to serve as an assistant to
a group overseer or, in some cases, as a group servant,
working under the close supervision of the elders. Ministerial servants may be assigned to handle certain parts
on the Life and Ministry Meeting, including conducting the
Congregation Bible Study if needed, and delivering public
talks. Other privileges may be extended to ministerial servants when there is a particular need and if they meet the
requirements for the assignment. (1 Pet. 4:10) In assisting
MINISTERIAL SERVANTS RENDER VALUABLE SERVICE

53

the elders, ministerial servants should give of themselves
willingly.
13 Though their work di?ers from that of the elders, it is
no less a part of sacred service to God and is important
to the smooth functioning of the congregation. In time, if
ministerial servants carry out their obligations well and become quali?ed to serve as shepherds and teachers, they
may be recommended to serve as elders.
14 If you are a brother who is a teenager or is newly baptized, are you reaching out to qualify to become a ministerial servant? (1 Tim. 3:1) With so many people coming
into the truth each year, quali?ed spiritual men are needed
to care for congregation responsibilities. You can reach out
by cultivating a desire to help others. One way to do this
is by meditating on Jesus’ ?ne example. (Matt. 20:28; John
4:6, 7; 13:4, 5) Your desire will grow as you experience the
joy that comes from giving to others. (Acts 20:35) Therefore, volunteer to give practical assistance to others, to
help with the maintenance of the Kingdom Hall, or to give a
substitute presentation during the Life and Ministry Meeting. Reaching out also includes developing spiritual qualities by having a good routine of personal study. (Ps. 1:1, 2;
Gal. 5:22, 23) In addition, a brother who is reaching out
demonstrates reliability and faithfulness when given congregation assignments.—1 Cor. 4:2.
15 Ministerial servants are appointed by holy spirit for the
good of the congregation. Members of the congregation
can show their appreciation for the hard work of the ministerial servants by cooperating with them as they care for
their assigned duties. In this way, the congregation will be
showing appreciation for Jehovah’s provision to maintain
an orderly household.—Gal. 6:10.
54

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 7

Meetings That
“Incite to Love and Fine Works”
THROUGHOUT the centuries, Jehovah’s people have met
together in an organized way. In ancient Israel, all males
traveled to Jerusalem for the three great festivals. (Deut.
16:16) In the ?rst century, Christians congregated regularly, often in someone’s home. (Philem. 1, 2) Today, we enjoy meetings, assemblies, and conventions. Why do God’s
servants meet together? Primarily because it is an important part of our worship.—Ps. 95:6; Col. 3:16.
2 Meetings also bene?t those who attend. Regarding
every seventh Festival of Booths, the Israelites were told:
“Gather the people together, the men, the women, the children, and your foreign resident who is within your cities, in
order that they may listen and learn and fear Jehovah your
God and take care to carry out all the words of this Law.”
(Deut. 31:12) Clearly, an important reason for meeting together is to be “taught by Jehovah.” (Isa. 54:13) Meetings
also provide the opportunity to get to know one another,
to receive encouragement, and to gain strength through
association.
CONGREGATION MEETINGS
3 Disciples who were gathered together after Pentecost 33 C.E. devoted themselves to the teaching of the
apostles, and “day after day they were in constant attendance in the temple with a united purpose.” (Acts 2:42,
46) Later, when Christians came together for worship, they
read from inspired writings, including letters written by the

MEETINGS THAT “INCITE TO LOVE AND FINE WORKS”

55

apostles and other Christian disciples. (1 Cor. 1:1, 2; Col.
4:16; 1 Thess. 1:1; Jas. 1:1) There was also congregation
prayer. (Acts 4:24-29; 20:36) At times, experiences from
the missionary ?eld were related. (Acts 11:5-18; 14:27, 28)
Bible doctrines and the ful?llment of inspired prophecies
were considered. Instruction was given in matters of approved Christian conduct and godly devotion. All were encouraged to be zealous proclaimers of the good news.
—Rom. 10:9, 10; 1 Cor. 11:23-26; 15:58; Eph. 5:1-33.
4 In our day, Christian meetings follow the pattern set in
apostolic times. We heed the inspired exhortation found at
Hebrews 10:24, 25: “Let us consider one another . . . , not
forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom,
but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you
see the day drawing near.” During these di?cult last days,
we need the added encouragement that comes from meeting together regularly so that we can maintain spiritual
strength and Christian integrity. (Rom. 1:11, 12) As Christians, we live among a crooked and twisted generation. We
have rejected ungodliness and worldly desires. (Phil. 2:15,
16; Titus 2:12-14) Really, where would we rather be than in
association with Jehovah’s people? (Ps. 84:10) And what
could be more bene?cial than the study and discussion of
the Word of God? Consider the various meetings that have
been arranged for our bene?t.
PUBLIC MEETING
5

The Public Meeting is usually held on the weekend in
conjunction with the weekly Watchtower Study. It is called
a public meeting because a Bible discourse is presented
that is especially designed for the general public, some
of whom may be attending a meeting for the ?rst time.
56

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

This meeting plays an important part in ?lling the spiritual needs of both newly associated ones and members of
the congregation.—Acts 18:4; 19:9, 10.
6 Christ Jesus, his apostles, and their associates conducted public meetings similar to those enjoyed today by
the congregations of Jehovah’s people. Without question,
Jesus was the greatest public speaker ever on earth. It was
said of him: “Never has any man spoken like this.” (John 7:
46) Jesus spoke with authority, astounding his audiences.
(Matt. 7:28, 29) Many were the bene?ts received by those
who took his message to heart. (Matt. 13:16, 17) The apostles followed his example. At Acts 2:14-36, we read Peter’s
powerful discourse on the day of Pentecost 33 C.E. Thousands were motivated to act as a result of what they heard.
Later, individuals became believers after listening to Paul’s
discourse in Athens.—Acts 17:22-34.
7 Similarly in our day, millions have bene?ted from the
weekly Public Meetings held in congregations as well as the
public discourses, or talks, presented at assemblies and
conventions. Such talks help us to remain alert to Christian
teachings and to be steadfast in Kingdom service. By inviting interested ones and the public in general, we may accomplish much to acquaint people with basic Bible teachings.
8 The subjects considered at the Public Meeting are varied. Talks cover Bible doctrine and prophecy, Scriptural principles and counsel regarding family life and marital matters, situations confronting youths, and Christian
morals. Some talks center on Jehovah’s marvelous works
of creation. Others highlight the exemplary faith, courage,
and integrity of Bible characters, focusing on lessons for
our day.
MEETINGS THAT “INCITE TO LOVE AND FINE WORKS”

57

9

To bene?t fully from the Public Meeting arrangement, it
is essential that we pay close attention, look up the scriptures referred to by the speaker, and follow along as he
reads and explains them. (Luke 8:18) As we thus make
sure of the things discussed, we will be determined to hold
fast to what we learn and to apply it.—1 Thess. 5:21.
10 If speakers are available, the congregation will no
doubt have a public talk every week. This is often accomplished by having speakers visit from nearby congregations. If there is a shortage of speakers, these talks are
given as often as possible.
THE WATCHTOWER STUDY
11

The public talk is normally followed by the Watchtower
Study, a question-and-answer discussion of articles published in the study edition of The Watchtower. By means
of The Watchtower, Jehovah provides us with timely spiritual food.
12 The study articles frequently deal with the application
of Bible principles in daily living. They fortify Christians
against “the spirit of the world” and unclean conduct.
(1 Cor. 2:12) Through the columns of The Watchtower
comes increased light on Bible doctrine and prophecy, enabling all to keep abreast of the truth and stay on the path
of the righteous ones. (Ps. 97:11; Prov. 4:18) Attending the
Watchtower Study and participating in it can help us to rejoice in the hope of Jehovah’s righteous new world. (Rom.
12:12; 2 Pet. 3:13) Our Christian association helps us to
cultivate the fruitage of the spirit and strengthens our desire to serve Jehovah zealously. (Gal. 5:22, 23) We are forti?ed to endure trials and to build “a ?ne foundation for
58

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

the future” so that we “may get a ?rm hold on the real
life.”—1 Tim. 6:19; 1 Pet. 1:6, 7.
13 How can we take full advantage of this provision for
spiritual feeding? We should prepare the lesson in advance,
either separately or as a family, look up the cited scriptures, and during the meeting comment in our own words.
This will sound down the truth into our heart, and others
will bene?t as they hear our expressions of faith. By listening carefully to the comments of others, we will bene?t from the lesson each week.
OUR CHRISTIAN LIFE AND MINISTRY
14

The congregation meets each week at the Kingdom
Hall for a program entitled Our Christian Life and Ministry. This meeting has three parts designed to help us to be
“adequately quali?ed” as ministers of God. (2 Cor. 3:5, 6)
The schedule and material will be provided in a monthly
Our Christian Life and Ministry—Meeting Workbook. The
Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook also contains outlines
of sample presentations for the ministry.
15 The ?rst part of this meeting, called Treasures From
God’s Word, will help us to become familiar with the background and context of Bible accounts and to learn how
they can be applied. The meeting includes a talk, a reading, and a discussion based on the weekly Bible reading.
Visual aids and worksheets to help teach these accounts
are included in the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook.
This in-depth consideration of the Bible bene?ts us in our
personal life and in our teaching, so that we “may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”
—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
MEETINGS THAT “INCITE TO LOVE AND FINE WORKS”

59

16

The second part of the meeting, Apply Yourself to the
Field Ministry, is designed to provide training for the ministry. Articles about the ?eld ministry—from the Life and
Ministry Meeting Workbook and other sources—as well as
videos are considered. In addition, in preparation for the
ministry, brothers and sisters present demonstrations by
giving a presentation, making a return visit, or conducting
a Bible study. This section of the meeting helps us to acquire “the tongue of those taught” so that we “may know
how to answer the tired one with the right word.”—Isa.
50:4.
17 The third part, Living as Christians, considers the practical application of Bible principles in day-to-day life. (Ps.
119:105) A primary feature of this part of the meeting is
the Congregation Bible Study. Like the Watchtower Study,
the Congregation Bible Study is a question-and-answer
discussion. Paragraphs are read, questions are asked,
comments are given, and scriptures are read. Before concluding the meeting with song and prayer, there is a brief
review of the meeting and a preview of the meeting for the
following week.
18 Every month when a new Life and Ministry Meeting
Workbook is received, the coordinator of the body of elders, or someone assisting him, carefully analyzes it and
makes a schedule. He should receive input from the Life
and Ministry Meeting overseer. Each week, either the Life
and Ministry Meeting overseer or another elder who is a
capable teacher and approved by the body of elders will
serve as the meeting chairman. His duties include ensuring that the meeting begins and ends on time and giving
counsel to those who have student assignments.
60

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

19

As we regularly prepare for, attend, and participate in
the Life and Ministry Meeting, we gain knowledge of the
Scriptures, understanding of Bible principles, con?dence
to preach the good news, and skill in making disciples.
Those attending who are not yet baptized Witnesses also
bene?t from the warm association and spiritually upbuilding discussions. To help us prepare for this meeting and
others, we can make use of Watchtower Library, JW Library, Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY (if available in your
language), and the library at the Kingdom Hall. The Kingdom Hall library contains the available publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Watch Tower Publications Index or
the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses, as well as a
number of Bible translations, a concordance, a dictionary,
and other helpful reference works. This library may be used
by anyone before or after the meetings.
MEETINGS FOR FIELD SERVICE
20

At various times during the week and on weekends,
groups of publishers will brie?y assemble at meetings for
?eld service. These meetings are usually held in private
homes or at other convenient places. The Kingdom Hall
may also be used for this purpose. Having smaller groups
gather in several locations in the territory may make it easier for publishers to travel to the meeting for service and to
the territory. Publishers can be organized quickly and head
to the territory without delay. The group overseer may also
be able to give closer attention to those in his care. While
there are advantages to having groups meet separately,
circumstances may dictate that several groups meet together. For example, if fewer publishers go in the ministry midweek, it may be advantageous to combine groups
MEETINGS THAT “INCITE TO LOVE AND FINE WORKS”

61

or to have all meet together
During these
at the Kingdom Hall or anothdi?cult last days,
er suitable location. This way,
we need the
publishers will have someone
encouragement
to work with. The congregation
that comes from
may also ?nd it convenient to
meeting together
meet at the Kingdom Hall on
regularly
worldly holidays. Or the congregation may choose to have
a combined meeting for ?eld
service after the Watchtower Study.
21 If groups meet separately, the group overseer takes
the lead in conducting the meeting for ?eld service. Periodically, a group overseer may assign his assistant or another quali?ed brother to conduct such meetings. Rather
than consider the day’s text, the conductor should be prepared to discuss something that will be practical and helpful for the ?eld ministry. Field service arrangements are
made, and one of the group o?ers a prayer. The group is
then ready to go into the ?eld. Such meetings last from
?ve to seven minutes but should be shorter if they follow
a congregation meeting. They should provide encouragement, practical instruction, and direction for those going
out in the preaching work. Newer ones or others who may
need assistance can work with experienced publishers to
receive training.
MEETING ARRANGEMENTS FOR
NEW OR SMALL CONGREGATIONS
22

As more become disciples, the number of congregations increases. An application for a new congregation is
usually submitted by the circuit overseer. However, in some
62

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

cases, small groups may ?nd it more advantageous to be
associated with the nearest congregation.
23 At times, small congregations may be composed entirely of sisters. When that is the case, a sister who prays
in the congregation or conducts meetings does so with her
head covered, in harmony with the Scriptural arrangement.
(1 Cor. 11:3-16) In most cases, she remains seated, facing
the group. Sisters do not give discourses at meetings. Instead, they read the material provided by the organization
and comment on it, or for variety, they may cover it in discussions or demonstrations. The branch o?ce will ask one
of the sisters to handle correspondence with the o?ce and
to care for meetings. In time, when brothers qualify to do
so, they will care for these responsibilities.
CIRCUIT ASSEMBLIES
24 Each year, arrangements are made for congregations
assigned to the same circuit to gather for two one-day
circuit assemblies. These joyous occasions a?ord all in
attendance opportunities to “open [their] hearts wide”
in Christian association. (2 Cor. 6:11-13) With a special
need in mind, Jehovah’s organization prepares the Scriptural themes and various parts of these programs. The information is presented by means of discourses, demonstrations, reenactments, soliloquies, and interviews. Such
timely instruction builds up all who attend. These assemblies provide an opportunity for new disciples to get baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah.

REGIONAL CONVENTIONS
25

Once each year, larger gatherings are held. These
are usually three-day regional conventions, combining
MEETINGS THAT “INCITE TO LOVE AND FINE WORKS”

63

congregations from a number of circuits. Smaller branches may ?nd it more practical for all congregations in the
branch territory to assemble at one location. In some
lands, arrangements for these gatherings may vary according to circumstances or on the basis of direction from
the organization. Periodically, international or special conventions are held in some countries and may be attended
by tens of thousands of Witnesses from a number of different lands. Over the years, many have learned about the
good news of the Kingdom because of the publicity given
to these large gatherings of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
26 For Jehovah’s dedicated people, conventions are joyous occasions of united worship. They have provided the
setting for revealing increased light on the truth. At some
conventions, new publications are released for personal and congregation study or for use in the ?eld ministry. Conventions also feature baptisms. Conventions are of
particular importance in promoting spiritual growth. They
give evidence that Jehovah’s people indeed form an international brotherhood of dedicated Christians who bear
the identifying mark of the disciples of Jesus Christ.—John
13:35.
27 By attending local congregation meetings as well as
assemblies and conventions of Jehovah’s people, we are
strengthened to do Jehovah’s will. We are also protected
against worldly in?uences that could undermine our Christian faith. Such gatherings all bring glory and praise to Jehovah. (Ps. 35:18; Prov. 14:28) We can be thankful that
Jehovah has provided these occasions of spiritual refreshment for his dedicated people in this time of the end.
64

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
28

Once each year on the anniversary of the death of
Jesus Christ, congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses
throughout the world observe the Memorial of Christ’s
death, or the Lord’s Evening Meal. (1 Cor. 11:20, 23, 24)
This is the most important meeting of the year for Jehovah’s people. We are speci?cally commanded to observe
the Memorial.—Luke 22:19.
29 The date of the Memorial corresponds with the date of
the Biblical Passover, which is indicated in the Scriptures.
(Ex. 12:2, 6; Matt. 26:17, 20, 26) The Passover was the annual commemoration of the Exodus of the Israelites from
Egypt in the year 1513 B.C.E. At that time, Jehovah marked
the 14th day of their ?rst lunar month as the date for them
to eat the Passover lamb and to leave their captivity in
Egypt. (Ex. 12:1-51) The date is determined by counting
13 days from the appearance of the new moon nearest the
spring equinox as visible in Jerusalem. Generally, the Memorial observance falls at the ?rst full moon following the
spring equinox.
30 Matthew 26:26-28 outlines in Jesus’ own words the
way that the Memorial is to be observed. It is not a ritual with mystical overtones but a symbolic meal that is
shared by those who have been called to be joint heirs
with Jesus Christ in his heavenly Kingdom. (Luke 22:2830) All other dedicated Christians and interested people
are encouraged to attend the Lord’s Evening Meal as observers. By their attendance, they show their appreciation
for the provision Jehovah God has made for the bene?t of
all mankind through his Son, Jesus Christ. Soon after the
MEETINGS THAT “INCITE TO LOVE AND FINE WORKS”

65

Memorial, a special public talk is given that is designed to
stimulate further interest in Bible study.
31 Jehovah’s Witnesses joyfully anticipate occasions for
assembling together at meetings, where we “consider one
another so as to incite to love and ?ne works.” (Heb. 10:
24) The faithful and discreet slave is alert to provide such
meetings according to our spiritual need. All of Jehovah’s
servants as well as interested people are urged to take
full advantage of the arrangements for regularly assembling together. By showing heartfelt appreciation for Jehovah’s provisions through his organization, God’s servants
are bound together in unity. More important, we praise and
glorify Jehovah.—Ps. 111:1.

66

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 8

Ministers of the Good News
JEHOVAH gave us a perfect model to follow—his Son, Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:21) When anyone becomes a follower
of Jesus, that person preaches the good news as one of
God’s ministers. Indicating that this would be spiritually refreshing, Jesus said: “Come to me, all you who are toiling
and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon
you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will ?nd refreshment for yourselves.”
(Matt. 11:28, 29) His promise has not failed any who have
responded to that invitation!
2 As God’s Chief Minister, Jesus called certain individuals
to be his followers. (Matt. 9:9; John 1:43) He trained them
in the ministry and sent them forth to do the same work
he was doing. (Matt. 10:1–11:1; 20:28; Luke 4:43) Later, he
sent forth 70 others to share in declaring the good news
concerning God’s Kingdom. (Luke 10:1, 8-11) When Jesus
sent these disciples forth, he said to them: “Whoever listens to you listens to me. And whoever disregards you disregards me also. Moreover, whoever disregards me disregards also him who sent me.” (Luke 10:16) In this way,
Jesus stressed the seriousness of the responsibility that
was given to the disciples. They were to represent Jesus
and the Most High God! It would be the same today for
all others who respond to Jesus’ invitation: “Come be my
follower.” (Luke 18:22; 2 Cor. 2:17) All who respond have
a divine commission to preach the good news of the Kingdom and to make disciples.—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20.
MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

67

3

Having responded to Jesus’ invitation to follow him, we
have been blessed with “coming to know” Jehovah God
and Jesus Christ. (John 17:3) We have been taught Jehovah’s ways. With his help, we have been able to make our
mind over, put on the new personality, and harmonize our
conduct with Jehovah’s righteous standards. (Rom. 12:1, 2;
Eph. 4:22-24; Col. 3:9, 10) Our heartfelt appreciation has
moved us to dedicate our lives to Jehovah and to symbolize that dedication by water baptism. At our baptism, we
are ordained as ministers.
4 Always keep in mind that service to God must be rendered with innocent hands and a pure heart. (Ps. 24:3, 4;
Isa. 52:11; 2 Cor. 6:14–7:1) Through faith in Jesus Christ,
we have gained a clean conscience. (Heb. 10:19-23, 35, 36;
Rev. 7:9, 10, 14) The apostle Paul admonished Christians
to do all things for God’s glory so as not to be stumbling
others. The apostle Peter pointed out the value of exemplary conduct in winning unbelievers over to the truth. (1 Cor.
10:31, 33; 1 Pet. 3:1) How can you help someone qualify
to join us as a minister of the good news?
NEW PUBLISHERS
5

From the time you begin conducting a Bible study with
an interested person, encourage him to tell others about
what he is learning. He could speak with relatives, friends,
work associates, and others on an informal basis. This is
an important step in teaching new ones to be followers
of Jesus Christ as ministers of the good news. (Matt. 9:9;
Luke 6:40) As the new one grows spiritually and becomes
adept at informal witnessing, he will no doubt express a
desire to share in the ?eld ministry.
68

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS
6

Before inviting a person to go from house to house for
the ?rst time, you should be sure that he meets certain
quali?cations. A person who accompanies us in the ?eld
ministry identi?es himself publicly with Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is therefore understood that he has already brought
his life into harmony with Jehovah’s righteous standards
and can be an unbaptized publisher.
7 As you study with a person and discuss Bible principles with him, you have likely become aware of his circumstances. You may have observed that he is living in harmony with what he has learned. But there are some aspects
of the student’s life that the elders will want to discuss with
the two of you together.
8 The coordinator of the body of elders will arrange for
two elders (one being a member of the service committee)
to discuss these matters with you and the Bible student.
In congregations that have very few elders, an elder and a
capable ministerial servant may do this. The brothers chosen should endeavor to have this discussion without delay.
In fact, if they learn of the student’s desire at a congregation meeting, it may be possible for them to talk to you and
your student after the meeting. The atmosphere should be
relaxed. Before the student can be approved as an unbaptized publisher, the following must be true:
? He believes that the Bible is the inspired Word of God.
—2 Tim. 3:16.
? He knows and believes the basic teachings of the
Scriptures so that when asked questions, he will answer
in harmony with the Bible and not according to false
MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

69

?
?

?

?
?

?
?
?

religious teachings or his own ideas.—Matt. 7:21-23;
2 Tim. 2:15.
He is heeding the Bible’s command to associate with
Jehovah’s people at congregation meetings if he is able
to do so.—Ps. 122:1; Heb. 10:24, 25.
He knows what the Bible teaches about sexual
immorality, including adultery, polygamy, and
homosexuality, and is living in harmony with those
teachings. If the person is living with one of the opposite
sex who is not a relative, the two must be properly
married.—Matt. 19:9; 1 Cor. 6:9, 10; 1 Tim. 3:2, 12;
Heb. 13:4.
He is heeding the Bible’s prohibition against drunkenness
and is free from all nonmedical use of addictive or
mind-altering natural or synthetic substances.
—2 Cor. 7:1; Eph. 5:18; 1 Pet. 4:3, 4.
He sees the value of avoiding unwholesome association.
—1 Cor. 15:33.
He has de?nitely broken o? membership in all false
religious organizations with which he may have been
a?liated. He has ceased attending their services and
sharing in or supporting their activities.—2 Cor. 6:14-18;
Rev. 18:4.
He is free from all involvement in the political a?airs of
the world.—John 6:15; 15:19; Jas. 1:27.
He believes and lives in harmony with what Isaiah 2:4
says about the a?airs of the nations.
He really wants to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
—Ps. 110:3.
9

If the elders are not sure how the student feels about
any of these matters, they should ask him, perhaps using
the scriptures here cited as a basis for the discussion. It
70

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

is important that he understand that those who share with
Jehovah’s Witnesses in their preaching activity must be
leading a life that harmonizes with these Scriptural requirements. What he says will help the elders determine whether he knows what is expected of him and whether he is
quali?ed to a reasonable degree to begin participating in
the ?eld ministry.
10 The elders should promptly let the student know
whether he quali?es. In most cases, this is possible at the
conclusion of the discussion. If he is quali?ed, the elders
can warmly welcome the individual as a publisher. (Rom.
15:7) He should be encouraged to begin sharing in the ?eld
ministry as soon as possible and to turn in a ?eld service
report at the end of the month. The elders can explain that
when a Bible student quali?es as an unbaptized publisher and reports ?eld service for the ?rst time, a Congregation’s Publisher Record card is made out in his name and
included in the congregation ?le. They can assure him that
all the elders take an interest in the ?eld service reports
that are turned in each month.
11 Our getting better acquainted with the new publisher
and showing a personal interest in what he has accomplished can have a ?ne e?ect on the individual. It may
move him to turn in ?eld service reports regularly and to
make even greater e?orts to serve Jehovah.—Phil. 2:4;
Heb. 13:2.
12 Once the elders have determined that the Bible student
quali?es to engage in the ?eld ministry, he is eligible to receive his own copy of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will. After he reports ?eld service for the ?rst time, a brief announcement that he is a new unbaptized publisher will be
made to the congregation.
MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

71

HELPING YOUNG PEOPLE
13

Young children may also qualify as publishers of the
good news. Jesus welcomed young children and blessed
them. (Matt. 19:13-15; 21:15, 16) Although parents are primarily responsible for their own children, others in the congregation may wish to help young ones who are motivated from the heart to share in the Kingdom-preaching work.
If you are a parent, your ?ne example in the ?eld ministry
will do much to encourage your children to be zealous in
their service to God. When a child who is exemplary in conduct is moved from the heart to make a personal expression of his faith to others, what further help can be given?
14 It would be appropriate for the parent to approach one
of the elders on the Congregation Service Committee to
discuss whether the child is quali?ed to become a publisher. The coordinator of the body of elders will arrange for
two elders (one being a member of the service committee) to meet with the child and his believing parent(s) or
guardian. If the child has a basic knowledge of Bible truth
and gives evidence of wanting to share in the ministry, this
would indicate good progress. After considering these and
other factors similar to those that apply to adults, the two
elders can determine whether the child may be recognized
as an unbaptized publisher. (Luke 6:45; Rom. 10:10) When
meeting with a young child, there would be no need to discuss some of the matters that are usually considered with
an adult but obviously do not apply to a child.
15 During the meeting, the elders should commend the
child for his progress and encourage him to set the goal
of baptism. Since the parents have no doubt worked hard
to instill the truth in their child, they too deserve commendation. To help the parents further assist their child, the
72

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

elders should refer them to “A Message to Christian Parents,” found on pages 165-166.
DEDICATION AND BAPTISM
16 If you have come to know and love Jehovah by meeting divine requirements and sharing in the ?eld ministry,
you need to solidify your personal relationship with him.
How? By dedicating your life to him and symbolizing this
by water baptism.—Matt. 28:19, 20.
17 Dedication signi?es a setting apart for a sacred purpose. To make a dedication to God means to approach him
in prayer and solemnly promise to use your life in his service and to walk in his ways. It means giving him exclusive devotion forever. (Deut. 5:9) This is a personal, private matter. No one can do it for you.
18 However, you must do more than privately tell Jehovah
that you want to belong to him. You need to show others that you have made a dedication to God. You make it
known by getting baptized in water, as Jesus did. (1 Pet.
2:21; 3:21) If you have made up your mind to serve Jehovah and want to get baptized, what should you do? You
should make your desire known to the coordinator of the
body of elders. He will arrange for several elders to talk
with you to make sure that you meet the divine requirements for baptism. For further information, please review
“A Message to the Unbaptized Publisher,” found on pages
167-169 of this publication, and “Questions for Those Desiring to Get Baptized,” found on pages 170-208.

REPORTING ON THE PROGRESS OF THE MINISTRY
19

Over the years, reports on the worldwide expansion of
pure worship have been a source of encouragement for
MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

73

Jehovah’s people. From the time Jesus Christ ?rst told his
disciples that the good news would be preached throughout all the earth, true Christians have been keenly interested in how this would be accomplished.—Matt. 28:19, 20;
Mark 13:10; Acts 1:8.
20 Early followers of Jesus enjoyed hearing reports about
the success of the preaching work. (Mark 6:30) The Bible book of Acts tells us that about 120 were present
when holy spirit was poured out on the disciples at Pentecost 33 C.E. Soon the number of disciples grew to about
3,000 and then to about 5,000. The report was made
that “Jehovah continued to add to them daily those being saved” and that “a large crowd of priests began to
be obedient to the faith.” (Acts 1:15; 2:5-11, 41, 47; 4:4;
6:7) What ?ne encouragement the news of these increases must have brought to the disciples! How these exciting
reports must have impelled them to move ahead with their
divinely commissioned work, in spite of severe persecution
instigated by the Jewish religious leaders!
21 About 60-61 C.E., Paul reported in his letter to the Colossians that the good news was “bearing fruit and increasing in all the world” and had been “preached in all
creation under heaven.” (Col. 1:5, 6, 23) The early Christians were obedient to the Word, and holy spirit empowered them to accomplish a tremendous preaching work before the end of the Jewish system of things in 70 C.E. How
encouraging it was for those faithful Christians to hear reports of what was being accomplished!
22 In like manner, Jehovah’s modern-day organization endeavors to keep records of the work being done in ful?llment of Matthew 24:14, which says: “This good news of
the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth
74

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

for a witness to all the nations,
Are you personally
and then the end will come.”
interested in seeing
As dedicated servants of God,
that the ministry
we have an urgent work to do.
is accomplished
We must be personally interbefore the end
ested in seeing that the miniscomes?
try is thoroughly accomplished
before the end comes. Jehovah will see to it that this work
is completed, and if we have a share, we will receive Jehovah’s smile of approval.—Ezek. 3:18-21.
YOUR PERSONAL FIELD SERVICE REPORT
23

What exactly are we to report? The Field Service Report slip provided by the organization indicates what information is to be included. However, the following general comments may prove to be helpful.
24 In the column titled “Placements (Printed and Electronic),” report the total number of publications—whether
printed or electronic—that you shared with individuals who
are not baptized Witnesses. Under “Video Showings,” report the number of times you were able to show one of
our videos.
25 In reporting “Return Visits,” count the total number
of calls made for the purpose of furthering interest previously shown by someone who is not a dedicated, baptized Witness. In order to count a return visit, you need to
contact the individual who previously showed interest. A
parent may count up to one return visit each week when
taking the lead during the Family Worship evening with an
unbaptized child present. A return visit can be made not
only by calling on someone at home but also by writing a
MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

75

letter, making a telephone call, sending a text message or
an e-mail, or delivering some literature, such as the latest
issue of a magazine. Each time a home Bible study is conducted, a return visit should be counted.
26 Although a Bible study is usually conducted each week,
it is reported as only one study each month. Publishers
should list the total number of di?erent Bible studies conducted during the month. Bible studies reported may include those conducted with people who are not dedicated,
baptized Witnesses. You may also count a Bible study conducted with an inactive brother or sister at the direction of
a member of the service committee or with a newly baptized person who has not yet completed the Bible Teach
and “God’s Love” books.
27 It is important to submit an accurate report of
“Hours.” Basically, this is the time you spend participating
in the house-to-house ministry, making return visits, conducting Bible studies, or otherwise witnessing informally
or publicly to people who are not dedicated, baptized Witnesses. If two publishers are working together, both may
count the time, but only one would count any return visits that are made or any Bible studies that are conducted.
Both parents who share in instructing their children during
Family Worship evening may count up to one hour a week.
Brothers may count the time spent delivering a public talk.
An interpreter for a public talk may count the time as well.
There are essential activities for which time is not counted, such as getting ready for field service, attending the
meeting for field service, running errands, and so forth.
28 Each publisher must follow his Bible-trained conscience
when prayerfully determining what constitutes a witnessing period. Some publishers preach in densely populated
76

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

areas, whereas others work territories where there are few
inhabitants and considerable travel is required. Territories
di?er; publishers di?er in the way they view their ministry.
The Governing Body does not impose its conscience on the
worldwide congregation as to how time spent in ?eld service is to be counted, nor has anyone else been appointed
to make a judgment in this matter.—Matt. 6:1; 7:1; 1 Tim.
1:5.
29 Time spent in the ?eld service should be reported in
full hours. An exception to this is made when a publisher
is very limited because of advanced age, is a shut-in, is
con?ned to a nursing home, or is otherwise incapacitated.
Such a publisher may report ?eld service in 15-minute increments. Even when he gives a witness for just 15 minutes during a month, he should report this time. He will be
counted as a regular Kingdom publisher. This arrangement
also applies to a publisher who is temporarily limited, perhaps unable to move about during a month or so because
of a serious illness or injury. This provision is only for those
who are very limited in their activity. The service committee will determine whether a publisher quali?es for this arrangement.
CONGREGATION’S PUBLISHER RECORD CARD
30 Your individual ?eld service report for each month
is recorded on a Congregation’s Publisher Record card.
These cards are not personal property. If you plan to move
to another congregation, be sure to inform your congregation elders. The secretary of your new congregation will
request that your Congregation’s Publisher Record card(s)
be forwarded. If the secretary of your former congregation knows the name of the congregation to which you

MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

77

relocate, he can take the initiative in sending the record
card(s) along with a letter of introduction. Consequently,
the elders of your new congregation will be in a better position to welcome you and give you needed spiritual assistance. If you are away from your congregation for less
than three months, please continue to send your ?eld service reports to your home congregation.
WHY WE REPORT OUR FIELD SERVICE
31

Do you sometimes forget to turn in your ?eld service
report? No doubt all of us need occasional reminders. But
if we cultivate the right attitude toward reporting and understand why doing so is important, it may be easier for
us to remember to report our ?eld service.
32 Some have asked: “Since Jehovah knows what I am
doing in his service, why do I need to put in a report to the
congregation?” True, Jehovah knows what we are doing,
and he knows whether our service is whole-souled or just
a token of what we are really able to do. Remember, however, that Jehovah recorded the number of days that Noah
spent in the ark and the number of years that the Israelites journeyed in the wilderness. God kept account of the
number of those who were faithful and of those who disobeyed. He recorded the progressive conquest of the land
of Canaan and the accomplishments of the faithful judges
of Israel. Yes, he recorded many details regarding the activities of his servants. He inspired this written record of
what took place, making clear to us his view of keeping
accurate records.
33 Historical events recorded in the Bible demonstrate the
exactness of reports and records kept by Jehovah’s people. In many cases, the full impact of the Bible account
78

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

could not be conveyed without reporting the speci?c numbers. Consider the following examples: Genesis 46:27; Exodus 12:37; Judges 7:7; 2 Kings 19:35; 2 Chronicles 14:913; John 6:10; 21:11; Acts 2:41; 19:19.
34 Although our reports obviously do not include all that
we do in our worship of Jehovah, they serve a practical
purpose within Jehovah’s organization. In the ?rst century, when the apostles returned from a preaching campaign,
they reported to Jesus “all the things they had done and
taught.” (Mark 6:30) At times, reports may indicate that
certain aspects of our ministry need particular attention.
The ?gures may show that while there has been progress
in some activities, other areas, such as publisher increase
or growth, have slowed down. It could be that encouragement is needed or that problems have to be resolved. Responsible overseers will take note of reports and endeavor
to rectify any condition that may be hindering the progress of individuals or of the congregation as a whole.
35 Reports are also bene?cial to the organization in determining just where there is a greater need for workers in the
?eld. What areas are more productive? Where is little progress being made? What publications are needed to help
people learn the truth? Reports enable the organization to
project literature needs for the preaching work in di?erent
parts of the world and then to keep ahead of those needs.
36 For most of us, reports mean encouragement. Are we
not thrilled when we hear about the work our brothers are
doing in preaching the good news worldwide? Reports of
increases help us to get an overall view of the expansion of
Jehovah’s organization. Experiences warm our hearts and
?ll us with zeal, moving us to have a fuller share in the
preaching work. (Acts 15:3) Our cooperation in turning in
MINISTERS OF THE GOOD NEWS

79

?eld service reports is important and shows our concern
for the brothers everywhere. In this small way, we demonstrate our submission to Jehovah’s organizational arrangement.—Luke 16:10; Heb. 13:17.
SETTING PERSONAL GOALS
37

There is no reason for us to compare our ?eld service with that of another person. (Gal. 5:26; 6:4) Individual circumstances vary. On the other hand, we can derive
much bene?t from setting realistic personal goals as a basis for measuring our progress in the ministry. Attaining
these goals can give us the satisfaction that comes with
accomplishment.
38 It is obvious that Jehovah is indeed speeding up the ingathering of those whom he will protect through “the great
tribulation.” We are living in the time of the ful?llment of
Isaiah’s prophecy: “The little one will become a thousand
and the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will
speed it up in its own time.” (Rev. 7:9, 14; Isa. 60:22) What
a privilege it is to be ministers of the good news during
these momentous last days!—Matt. 24:14.

80

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 9

Methods
of Preaching the Good News
AS A vigorous proclaimer of the good news, Jesus set an
example for his followers. He took the initiative to go out
among the people, speaking and teaching in their homes
and in public places. (Matt. 9:35; 13:36; Luke 8:1) Jesus
spoke with individuals, taught his disciples privately, and
addressed groups numbering into the thousands. (Mark 4:
10-13; 6:35-44; John 3:2-21) He took advantage of every
appropriate occasion to speak words of encouragement
and hope. (Luke 4:16-19) Even when he was in need of rest
and refreshment, he did not pass up opportunities to witness. (Mark 6:30-34; John 4:4-34) When we read the inspired accounts of Jesus’ ministry, are we not moved to
imitate him? Certainly we are, just as the apostles were.
—Matt. 4:19, 20; Luke 5:27, 28; John 1:43-45.
2 Consider the opportunities that are open to Christians
today to share in the work initiated by Jesus Christ nearly 2,000 years ago.
PREACHING FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE
3

As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we recognize the value of
preaching the good news of the Kingdom systematically
from house to house. We have used this method so extensively that it has become our trademark. The wisdom of using this method to reach millions of people in a short period of time has been con?rmed by gratifying results. (Matt.
11:19; 24:14) The house-to-house ministry has proved to
METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

81

be a practical way for us to demonstrate love for Jehovah
and for our neighbor.—Matt. 22:34-40.
4 House-to-house preaching is not a modern innovation
of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The apostle Paul refers to his
teaching in the homes of people. Describing his ministry
to the overseers in Ephesus, he said: “From the ?rst day I
stepped into the province of Asia, . . . I did not hold back
from telling you any of the things that were pro?table nor
from teaching you . . . from house to house.” In this and
other ways, Paul “thoroughly bore witness both to Jews
and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in
our Lord Jesus.” (Acts 20:18, 20, 21) At that time, Roman
emperors encouraged idolatry, and many were “given to
the fear of the deities.” It was urgent that people seek “the
God who made the world and all the things in it,” the One
who was then “declaring to all people everywhere that they
should repent.”—Acts 17:22-31.
5 Today, the need to reach people with the good news is
even more urgent. The end of this wicked system of things
is rapidly approaching. Seeing this need, we are moved to
increase our e?orts. No better way has been found than
the time-tested method of searching from house to house
for those who are hungering for the truth. It is as e?ective today as it was in the days of Jesus and the apostles.
—Mark 13:10.
6 Are you able to have a full share in the house-to-house
ministry? If so, you can be sure that Jehovah is pleased
with you. (Ezek. 9:11; Acts 20:35) The house-to-house ministry may not be easy for you. You may have physical limitations, or you may be preaching in a territory where many
people are not inclined to listen. There may even be gov82

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

ernmental restrictions. Perhaps you are shy, and you ?nd
it very di?cult to initiate conversations with strangers.
Therefore, each time you engage in the house-to-house
ministry, you experience a measure of anxiety. Do not be
discouraged. (Ex. 4:10-12) Your circumstances are not unlike those of your brothers in many other places.
7 Jesus promised his disciples: “Look! I am with you all
the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
(Matt. 28:20) That promise forti?es us in the disciplemaking work. We feel like the apostle Paul, who said: “For
all things I have the strength through the one who gives
me power.” (Phil. 4:13) Take full advantage of congregation
arrangements for engaging in the house-to-house witnessing. By working with others, you will receive encouragement and personal assistance. Pray for help to overcome
whatever obstacles you may face, and exert yourself vigorously as a preacher of the good news.—1 John 5:14.
8 As you speak to others about the good news, you will
have opportunities to give them “a reason for the hope you
have.” (1 Pet. 3:15) You will become more and more aware
of the contrast between those who have the Kingdom hope
and those who are without hope. (Isa. 65:13, 14) You will
have the satisfaction of knowing that you have been obedient to Jesus’ command to “let your light shine,” and you
may even be privileged to help others come to know Jehovah and the truth that leads to everlasting life.—Matt. 5:
16; John 17:3; 1 Tim. 4:16.
9 Arrangements are made for house-to-house activity on
weekends as well as during the week. In areas where it is
di?cult to ?nd people at home during the day, some congregations arrange for evening witnessing. People may be
METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

83

more inclined to receive visitors in the late afternoon or
early evening hours than in the morning.
SEARCHING OUT DESERVING ONES
10 Jesus instructed his disciples to “search out” deserving
ones. (Matt. 10:11) His search for those favorably disposed
was not limited to the house-to-house ministry. Indeed, he
gave a witness on every appropriate occasion, both formal and informal. (Luke 8:1; John 4:7-15) The apostles also
witnessed to people at a variety of locations.—Acts 17:17;
28:16, 23, 30, 31.
11 Likewise today, our objective is to reach everyone possible with the Kingdom message. This means imitating Jesus and his apostles in their approach to the disciplemaking work as well as keeping abreast of the changing
times and the varying circumstances of the people in our
territory. (1 Cor. 7:31) Therefore, we also engage in public witnessing within our congregation territory. (Acts 20:
20) Publishers have been successful in calling on people
at places of business. Street witnessing has proved e?ective in many countries, as has witnessing in parks, parking lots, or wherever people can be found. Some congregations have set up tables or mobile displays within their
territory. In addition, the branch o?ce may organize special metropolitan public witnessing in high pedestrian traf?c areas of a city, using participants from several congregations. As a result, individuals who are not at home when
publishers call may be contacted elsewhere with the good
news.
12 Presenting The Watchtower and Awake! is an e?ective
way to do public witnessing. We can approach people in a
kind and tactful manner and share with them a timely sub-

84

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

ject discussed in one of the magazines. Or we can o?er
other literature. We can then arrange to call on them at
their homes. You may ?nd witnessing to people in public
places an enjoyable way to expand your ministry.
13 However, proclaiming the good news is not all that is
involved in the work assigned to Christians today. If you
are to succeed in helping others embrace the truth that
leads to life, you will want to make repeated calls on interested ones so that they can progress toward becoming
mature Christians.
MAKING RETURN VISITS
14

Jesus said to his followers: “You will be witnesses of
me . . . to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8)
But he also told them: “Go, therefore, and make disciples
of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe
all the things I have commanded you.” (Matt. 28:19, 20)
Making return visits can be a source of joy in Jehovah’s
service. People who expressed interest in the good news
when you ?rst called on them will likely be happy to see you
again. By sharing additional Bible information with them,
you may be able to strengthen their faith in God and help
them to become aware of their spiritual need. (Matt. 5:3)
If you prepare well and arrange to make the return visit at
a time convenient for them, you may be able to start a
home Bible study. Doing so will usually be your objective
in making return visits. We not only plant the seed of truth
but also water it.—1 Cor. 3:6.
15 Making return visits may be a challenge for some. Perhaps you have become quite pro?cient in making a brief
presentation of the good news, and you enjoy that particular feature of the ministry. But when you think of returning
METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

85

to engage the householder in
Our objective
a discussion of the Bible,
is to reach
the challenge may seem overeveryone possible
whelming. You need not feel
with the Kingdom
that way. Very likely, you
message
placed some Bible literature
with the interested person on
the ?rst call. Why not discuss
something contained in that publication? You can prepare
for this ahead of time. If you do not feel comfortable, arrange to have a more experienced publisher accompany
you.
CONDUCTING HOME BIBLE STUDIES
16 When speaking to a Jewish proselyte who was reading God’s Word, the evangelizer Philip asked him: “Do you
actually know what you are reading?” The man responded: “Really, how could I ever do so unless someone guided me?” The Bible account in Acts chapter 8 then tells us
that starting with the passage of Scripture that the man
had been reading, Philip “declared to him the good news
about Jesus.” (Acts 8:26-36) We do not know how much
time Philip spent with the man, but Philip explained the
good news to the point that the man became a believer
and asked to get baptized. He became a disciple of Jesus
Christ.
17 Many today are not familiar with the Bible, so it may
require a number of return visits and a detailed study over
a period of weeks, months, or even a year or more before
they are able to build faith and qualify for baptism. But
your patient and loving assistance in helping honesthearted ones become disciples has its own reward, even as Je-

86

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

sus said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is
in receiving.”—Acts 20:35.
18 You will no doubt want to conduct a home Bible study
using one of the publications that is especially designed
for that purpose. By following the example of the one who
studied with you, you will be able to conduct productive
studies, helping others to become disciples of Jesus Christ.
19 If you need assistance in starting and conducting a
home Bible study, feel free to speak with one of the overseers or with a fellow Witness who is e?ective in the Bible
study work. The suggestions that appear in the Life and
Ministry Meeting Workbook and are demonstrated at the
meeting will also help you. Rely on Jehovah, and make your
desire a matter of prayer. (1 John 3:22) So if at all possible, make it your aim to conduct a home Bible study in addition to any study that you may conduct with your family. By conducting Bible studies, you will increase your joy
in the ministry.
DIRECTING INTERESTED ONES TO JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION
20 When we help people to come to know Jehovah God
and become disciples of Jesus Christ, they become a part
of the congregation. Bible students will make spiritual
progress and grow to maturity if they recognize Jehovah’s
organization and cooperate with it. Teaching them how to
do so is important. Videos and the brochure Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today? have been speci?cally prepared
for this purpose. Some of the information in Chapter 4 of
this publication may also be helpful.
21 From the very beginning of your Bible discussions, help
the student to see that Jehovah is using an organization

METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

87

to get the preaching work done on earth today. Point out
the value of our Bible study aids, and explain how they
are produced and distributed worldwide by volunteer workers who are dedicated to God. Invite your Bible student to
accompany you to the meetings at the Kingdom Hall. Explain how the meetings are conducted, and introduce him
to the friends there. You will also want to help him get acquainted with other Witnesses at assemblies and conventions. On these and other occasions, let the new one observe for himself how Jehovah’s people display love, the
identifying mark of true Christians. (John 13:35) As the interested one grows in appreciation for Jehovah’s organization, he will draw closer to Jehovah.
USING BIBLE LITERATURE
22

The early Christians became zealous publishers of the
Word of God. They made copies of the Scriptures for their
personal use and for congregation study. They recommended God’s Word of truth to others. Their handwritten
copies were few in number and highly treasured. (Col. 4:16;
2 Tim. 2:15; 3:14-17; 4:13; 1 Pet. 1:1) Today, Jehovah’s Witnesses use modern printing methods to publish millions of
Bibles and hundreds of millions of Bible study aids. These
include tracts, brochures, books, and magazines in several hundred languages.
23 As you share the good news with others, be sure to
make use of the Bible study aids provided by Jehovah’s organization. Various publications will be featured during the
month. In addition, you will be able to o?er magazines at
di?erent times each month, including on magazine days.
Knowing how much you have personally bene?ted from
reading and studying the publications of Jehovah’s Wit88

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

nesses will motivate you to share them with others.—Heb.
13:15, 16.
24 More and more people are using the Internet as their
primary source of information. Therefore, in addition to Bible literature, our o?cial website, jw.org, is an e?ective tool
for spreading the good news. Individuals around the world
can use the computer to read or listen to audio recordings
of the Bible and Bible literature in hundreds of languages.
Those who hesitate to converse with us or who live in areas
where they have few opportunities to talk to Jehovah’s Witnesses are able to investigate our beliefs by using jw.org
in the privacy of their home.
25 Therefore, we publicize jw.org at every appropriate opportunity. If a householder asks a question about our beliefs, we can use a mobile device or a computer to show
him the answer right then and there. If we meet someone
who speaks another language, including a sign language,
we can direct him to our website to ?nd the Bible and Bible literature in his language. Many publishers have used
one of the videos on the website to start a Bible discussion.
INFORMAL WITNESSING
26 To those who were paying attention to his word, Jesus
said: “You are the light of the world. . . . Let your light shine
before men, so that they may see your ?ne works and give
glory to your Father who is in the heavens.” (Matt. 5:1416) Those disciples re?ected God’s ways by imitating Jesus, who said of himself: “I am the light of the world.” Jesus
set the example for Christians in letting “the light of life”
shine for the bene?t of all who would listen.—John 8:12.
27 The apostle Paul likewise set an example for us to follow. (1 Cor. 4:16; 11:1) While in Athens, he witnessed every

METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

89

day in the marketplace to those who happened to be on
hand. (Acts 17:17) The Christians in Philippi followed his
example. For that reason, Paul could write to them that
they were living “in the midst of a crooked and twisted
generation,” among whom they were “shining as illuminators in the world.” (Phil. 2:15) We today can let the Kingdom truth shine forth by our words and actions whenever
there is an opportunity for us to tell others about the good
news. True, our good example as honest and upright people may in itself draw attention to the fact that we are different from the world. However, if we talk to them about
the good news, they will get to know why we are di?erent.
28 Many of Jehovah’s people present the good news to
those whom they meet at work, in school, on public transportation, or elsewhere while going about their daily activities. When on a journey, we may have the opportunity to
talk with fellow travelers. Individually, we must be alert to
opportunities to turn ordinary conversation into a witness.
Let us be prepared to speak with others on every appropriate occasion.
29 We will be motivated to do so if we keep in mind that
we are praising our Creator and bringing honor to his
name. In addition, we may be able to help honesthearted
ones come to know Jehovah so that they too can serve
him and gain the hope of life that comes through faith in
Jesus Christ. Jehovah is pleased by such e?orts and considers it sacred service.—Heb. 12:28; Rev. 7:9, 10.
TERRITORY
30

It is Jehovah’s will that the Kingdom message be
preached worldwide, both in cities and in rural areas. To
this end, congregations as well as individuals who serve
90

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

in isolated places receive territory assignments from the
branch o?ce. (1 Cor. 14:40) This is consistent with the
God-directed arrangement in the ?rst century. (2 Cor.
10:13; Gal. 2:9) With the rapid expansion of the Kingdom work in these last days, much is accomplished when
the arrangement for working congregation territory is wellorganized.
31 This arrangement comes under the direction of the service overseer. A ministerial servant may do the actual assigning of territory and keep the records up-to-date. There
are two types of territories, group territories and personal territories. Where territory is limited, group overseers will
have group territories in which publishers in the group can
preach. On the other hand, where territory is plentiful, individual publishers may obtain personal territories.
32 A publisher who has a personal territory will have
somewhere to preach at times when no meetings for ?eld
service have been arranged or when it is impractical to
meet the group. For example, some publishers obtain a
territory near their place of work and preach there during
lunch breaks or after work. Some families obtain a personal territory in the neighborhood where they live, and they
preach in it on some evenings. Having a conveniently located personal territory may help a publisher to make the
most of the time he can devote to ?eld service. Of course,
personal territories may also be used for group witnessing.
If you wish to have a personal territory, you may request
one from the territory servant.
33 Whether it is a group territory obtained by the group
overseer or a personal territory obtained by a publisher, the person who obtained the territory will make sure
that it is worked thoroughly. This entails making sure that
METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

91

reasonable e?ort is made to contact someone at every
residence. Perhaps some householders can be reached by
other means, such as by letter, telephone, or street witnessing. Any group overseer or publisher who obtains a
territory should endeavor to cover it within four months.
Once it is completed, he should inform the territory servant that the territory has been worked, so that the records
can be updated. The group overseer or publisher can either keep the territory and work it again or return it to the
territory servant.
34 When all those associated with the congregation cooperate, the territory can be covered thoroughly. We can
also avoid simultaneous coverage of the same area by
two or more publishers, something that could irritate the
householders. Thus we show consideration for our brothers and for the people in the territory.
COOPERATING TO PREACH TO PEOPLE OF ALL LANGUAGES
35 Everyone needs to learn about Jehovah God, his Son,
and the Kingdom. (Rev. 14:6, 7) We are interested in helping people of all languages to call on the name of Jehovah
for salvation and to put on the Christian personality. (Rom.
10:12, 13; Col. 3:10, 11) What are some challenges that
arise when presenting the good news in multilingual areas?
How can these be handled in a way that gives as many as
possible the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message in
the language they understand best?—Rom. 10:14.
36 The territory assignment for each congregation is according to language. Therefore, in multilingual areas, publishers from di?erent congregations preach in the same
neighborhoods. In such cases, it is best for the publishers from each congregation to concentrate on ?nding

92

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

and preaching to the people of their own speci?c language. Generally, this means that when going from house
to house, they will o?er literature only in the language of
their congregation. They will skip residences that belong
to the territory of other-language congregations. This also
applies during annual invitation campaigns. When engaging in public and informal witnessing, however, publishers may speak with anyone and o?er literature in any language.
37 In some cases, other-language congregations cannot
cover their more distant territory regularly and may prefer
that the congregations working those areas not skip any
homes. Publishers can do their best to convey the Kingdom
message to people who speak another language. When an
interested person is found, it is usually best for the congregation that holds meetings in his language to cultivate his
interest. Circumstances vary, so the service overseers of
the congregations involved should communicate with one
another to work out a mutually acceptable system of covering the territory. This will give everyone an opportunity
to hear the Kingdom message and will prevent unnecessary overlapping of e?orts, which may irritate the householders.—Prov. 15:22.
38 What should we do if the person who answers the door
speaks a language di?erent from ours? We should not
assume that publishers who speak his language will call
on him. Therefore, we should use the booklet Good News
for People of All Nations to determine his language and
give him a witness. Some publishers have learned a simple presentation in a language that they often encounter in
their territory. We can show a person how he may read or
METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

93

download literature in his language from our o?cial website, jw.org, or we can o?er to bring him literature in his
language.
39 If the individual shows genuine interest, we should try
to ?nd someone who is quali?ed to help him in a language
he understands. We can also tell him where nearby meetings are held in his language. If he wishes to be contacted by someone who speaks his language, we can show him
how to enter his contact information on jw.org. In turn, the
branch o?ce will endeavor to locate a nearby publisher,
group, or congregation that can assist him further.
40 Until the interested person tells us that he has been
contacted by someone who speaks his language, we
should continue calling on him. In some cases, the branch
o?ce will inform the elders that someone who speaks the
person’s language could not be located. When this occurs,
we should do our best to continue cultivating the householder’s interest. If possible, we can study the Bible with
him, perhaps with the aid of a publication in his language.
If we make good use of the pictures and have the person
read the cited scriptures, he will get some basic Bible understanding. A member of his family who knows enough of
his language and the local language may be willing to serve
as an interpreter.
41 In order to direct the interested person to God’s organization, we should invite him to our meetings, even
though he will not fully understand the program. When
scriptures are read, we can help him ?nd them by using a
Bible in his language if one is available. Associating with
others in the congregation can in itself be upbuilding and
will help him make further spiritual progress.
94

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

42

If a sizable number of people in the congregation territory speak another language, the body of elders may request approval from the branch o?ce to host a pregroup.
A pregroup consists of a number of publishers who are
preaching in a foreign language but have no quali?ed elder
or ministerial servant who can conduct a weekly meeting
in that language. From time to time, the elders can ?nd out
what possible support there might be for meetings in that
language by having a public talk or a Watchtower Study or
by arranging a tie-in to a meeting of a congregation that
holds meetings in the language.
43 There are four basic requirements for forming a group:
(1) Su?cient interest and potential for growth exists in a
particular language ?eld. (2) At least a small number of
publishers know the language or are learning it. (3) A quali?ed elder or ministerial servant is available to take the
lead and conduct at least one weekly meeting in that language. (4) A body of elders is willing to host the group.
When these requirements are met to a reasonable degree,
the body of elders will write to the branch o?ce about the
particulars of the group and will request formal recognition as a congregation hosting a foreign-language group.
The elder or ministerial servant taking the lead would be
considered the group overseer or group servant responsible for taking care of the group.
44 Generally, one of the ?rst parts of the Life and Ministry Meeting that a foreign-language group will hold each
week is the Congregation Bible Study. It is usually held in
an auxiliary room at the Kingdom Hall. In time, student assignments on the Life and Ministry Meeting may be presented in the auxiliary room if an elder or a ministerial
METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

95

servant conversant with the language can serve as the
chairman. The elders may approve the holding of other
meetings, such as the Public Meeting and the Watchtower
Study. Meetings for ?eld service may also be arranged for
the group. All in the group work under the oversight of
the body of elders hosting the group. The elders will provide balanced direction and show initiative in caring for the
needs of the group. When a circuit overseer works with the
group during the week of his visit to the host congregation,
he will provide the branch o?ce with a brief report on the
group’s progress and mention any speci?c needs. In due
course, it may be possible for the group to become a congregation. If all involved in working the foreign-language
?eld apply theocratic direction, Jehovah will be pleased.
—1 Cor. 1:10; 3:5, 6.
GROUP WITNESSING
45 Dedicated Christians have a personal responsibility to
share the good news with others. There are many ways to
do this, but most of us appreciate being able to go out in
?eld service with others. (Luke 10:1) For this reason, congregations meet for ?eld service on weekends as well as
during the week. Holidays also provide ?ne opportunities
for group witnessing, since many brothers have time o?
from work. The service overseer should take the lead by
working with the body of elders in arranging meetings for
?eld service at convenient times and locations during the
day and in the evenings.
46 Group witnessing enables publishers to work together
and experience “an interchange of encouragement.” (Rom.
1:12) Newer publishers can work along with skilled, experienced publishers and receive training. In some areas, it

96

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

may be advisable for two or more publishers to work together for safety reasons. Even if you are planning to work
by yourself in the territory, meeting with the group can
be encouraging for all concerned. Just knowing that others are out in the ministry, working in the same general
area, can give you con?dence. Pioneers and others should
not feel obliged to support every meeting for ?eld service
organized by the congregation, especially if such are held
each day. However, it will likely be possible for them to support at least some meetings for service each week.
47 May all of us follow the pattern set by Jesus and his
apostles! We can be certain of Jehovah’s blessing on our
endeavors to have a full share in the vital work of preaching this good news of the Kingdom.—Luke 9:57-62.

METHODS OF PREACHING THE GOOD NEWS

97

CHAPTER 10

Ways to Expand Your Ministry
WHEN the time came for Jesus to send his disciples out
as Kingdom preachers, he said to them: “The harvest is
great, but the workers are few.” There was much work to
be done, so he added: “Beg the Master of the harvest to
send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:37, 38) Jesus
told the disciples how to carry out their ministry. There was
a sense of urgency in his words: “You will by no means
complete the circuit of the cities of Israel until the Son of
man arrives.”—Matt. 10:23.
2 Today, too, there is much to be done in the ?eld ministry. This good news of the Kingdom must be preached before the end comes, and time is running out! (Mark 13:10)
Since the ?eld is the world, we are faced with a situation
quite similar to that of Jesus and his disciples but on a
much larger scale. We are few in number compared with
the billions in the world of mankind, but we can be sure
that Jehovah will help us. The Kingdom good news will be
preached throughout the earth, and in Jehovah’s due time,
the end will come. Will we put God’s Kingdom ?rst in our
life in order to accomplish our ministry fully? What theocratic goals can we pursue to that end?
3 Expressing what Jehovah asks of His dedicated servants, Jesus said: “You must love Jehovah your God with
your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your
whole mind and with your whole strength.” (Mark 12:30)
We are required to be whole-souled in our service to God.
This means that we demonstrate the depth of our devotion and the genuineness of our dedication by doing our
98

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

utmost in Jehovah’s service. (2 Tim. 2:15) There are opportunities open to each of us, according to our individual circumstances and abilities. Just consider what some of
these opportunities are, and decide what theocratic goals
you will pursue in ful?lling your ministry.
SERVING AS A CONGREGATION PUBLISHER
4

All who embrace the truth have the privilege of publishing the good news. This is the basic work that Jesus
gave his disciples to do. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) A disciple of Jesus Christ usually begins speaking to others about
the good news as soon as he hears it. That is what Andrew, Philip, Cornelius, and others did. (John 1:40, 41, 4345; Acts 10:1, 2, 24; 16:14, 15, 25-34) Does this mean that
a person may tell others about the good news even before
he gets baptized? Yes! As soon as an individual quali?es
as an unbaptized publisher in the congregation, the opportunity to participate in house-to-house witnessing is open
to him. Also, according to his ability and circumstances,
he may share in other features of the ?eld ministry.
5 After a publisher gets baptized, he is no doubt interested in doing all he can to help others learn the good news.
Men and women alike have the privilege of sharing in the
preaching work. We are blessed to have even a small part
in advancing the interests of God’s Kingdom. Anyone who
can expand his ministry to include additional features of
service will be happy indeed.
SERVING WHERE THE NEED IS GREATER
6 It may be that your congregation territory is frequently worked and a ?ne witness is being given. If so, you may
feel that you could expand your ministry by moving to an
area where there is a greater need in the ?eld. (Acts 16:9)

WAYS TO EXPAND YOUR MINISTRY

99

If you are presently an elder or a ministerial servant, there
may be another congregation that would appreciate having your assistance. Your circuit overseer may have suggestions about how you can assist another congregation
in the circuit. If you wish to serve in another area of the
country, the branch o?ce can provide helpful information.
7 Would you like to serve in a foreign country? If so, you
need to consider such a move carefully. Why not discuss
the matter with the elders in your congregation? Such a
move will certainly have an impact on you and any who
accompany you. (Luke 14:28) However, if you do not plan
to stay for a long time, it may be best to consider serving
in an area within your home country.
8 In some lands, brothers who are being used in positions of oversight are relatively new in the truth. Humble
local brothers are willing to let more experienced elders
who move into the congregation take the lead. If you are
an elder and are contemplating a move to such a country,
keep in mind that your objective is not to serve in place
of the local brothers. Instead, serve with them. Encourage
them to reach out and accept congregation responsibilities. (1 Tim. 3:1) Be patient if some things are not done
as they would be done in your home country. Use your experience as an elder to be a real help to the brothers. Then,
if at some point you must leave and return to your home
country, the local elders will be in a better position to care
for the congregation.
9 Before the branch o?ce can provide you with names
of congregations that could bene?t from your assistance,
your Congregation Service Committee will need to provide
a letter of recommendation. This letter is required whether
you are serving as an elder, a ministerial servant, a pio100

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

neer, or a publisher. The service committee will send the
letter of recommendation along with your inquiry directly to the branch o?ce of the country where you desire to
serve.
PREACHING IN ANOTHER LANGUAGE
10 In order to expand your ministry, you may wish to consider learning another language, including a sign language.
If you have the goal of learning to preach in another language, why not speak with the elders and the circuit overseer? They can o?er suggestions and give you needed encouragement. Under the direction of the branch o?ce,
some circuits have organized language classes to train capable publishers and pioneers to preach in another language.

PIONEER SERVICE
11

All publishers should be acquainted with the general requirements for auxiliary, regular, and special pioneer
service as well as other types of full-time service. A pioneer must be an exemplary baptized Christian whose personal circumstances allow him or her to spend the speci?ed number of hours each month in preaching the good
news. The Congregation Service Committee approves applications for auxiliary and regular pioneer service, whereas special pioneers are appointed by the branch o?ce.
12 Auxiliary pioneers may be appointed for a minimum of
one month, for any number of consecutive months, or continuously for an unspeci?ed length of time, according to
their circumstances. Many Kingdom publishers enjoy serving as auxiliary pioneers on special occasions, such as during the Memorial season or during the month of the circuit
WAYS TO EXPAND YOUR MINISTRY

101

overseer’s visit. Some choose vacation months. Baptized,
school-age publishers may wish to enroll as auxiliary pioneers when they have time o? from school. Publishers can
choose to auxiliary pioneer with a reduced hour requirement each March and April and during the month of the
circuit overseer’s visit. Whatever your personal circumstances, if you are of good moral standing and habits, can
arrange to meet the speci?ed hour requirement, and believe that you can spend one or more months as an auxiliary pioneer, the elders will be pleased to consider your
application for this privilege of service.
13 To qualify as a regular pioneer, you must currently be
in a position to reach the yearly hour requirement. As a
regular pioneer, you will want to work closely with your congregation. Zealous pioneers are a blessing to a congregation, generating enthusiasm for the ?eld ministry and even
encouraging others to take up the pioneer service. Before
you can apply to be a regular pioneer, however, you must
be an exemplary publisher who has been baptized for at
least six months.
14 Special pioneers are usually selected from among regular pioneers who have demonstrated their e?ectiveness
in the ministry. They must be able to serve wherever the
branch o?ce chooses to assign them. Often, this is an isolated area where they can ?nd interest and form new congregations. At times, special pioneers are assigned to congregations that need help in covering their territory. Some
special pioneers who are also elders have been assigned
to help small congregations, even when there is no particular need for more workers in the ?eld. Special pioneers
receive a modest allowance for living expenses. Some special pioneers are appointed on a temporary basis.
102

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

FIELD MISSIONARIES
15

The Service Committee of the Governing Body appoints ?eld missionaries, who are then assigned by
the local Branch Committee to serve in densely populated areas. They accomplish much good in stabilizing and
strengthening the preaching work and congregation activities. Very often, ?eld missionaries have received training
at the School for Kingdom Evangelizers or the Watchtower
Bible School of Gilead. They are provided housing and receive a modest allowance for living expenses.
CIRCUIT WORK
16 Those who are appointed as circuit overseers by the
Governing Body receive training and gain experience ?rst
by serving as substitute circuit overseers. Such men love
the ministry and love their brothers. They are zealous pioneers, diligent students of the Bible, and e?ective speakers and teachers. They are outstanding in manifesting the
fruitage of the spirit, and they demonstrate balance, reasonableness, and discernment. If a brother is married, his
pioneer wife is exemplary in her conduct and dealings with
others. She is an e?ective preacher. She also understands
her role as a submissive Christian wife, not speaking for
her husband or dominating conversations. Circuit overseers and their wives have a rigorous schedule, so those
reaching out for this service must be in good health. Pioneers do not apply for the circuit work. Rather, they make
their desire to be in the circuit work known to their circuit
overseer, who will provide them with suggestions.

THEOCRATIC SCHOOLS
17

School for Kingdom Evangelizers: There is a need
for more Kingdom evangelizers to cover seldom-worked
WAYS TO EXPAND YOUR MINISTRY

103

territories and to give congregations spiritual support.
Therefore, single brothers, single sisters, and married couples may apply to receive specialized training at the School
for Kingdom Evangelizers. After attending the school, graduates are sent out to serve as regular pioneers where the
need is greater in their home country. However, those who
can make themselves available may be given other assignments in their home country or in another country. A few
may be sent out as temporary or permanent special pioneers. Pioneers who are interested in attending this school
may learn of the requirements at the meeting arranged for
this purpose at the regional convention.
18 Watchtower Bible School of Gilead: Single brothers,
single sisters, and married couples who are selected to attend this school speak English and are serving as special
pioneers, ?eld missionaries, circuit overseers, or Bethelites. They have the potential for strengthening and stabilizing the ?eld or the branch organization. They have already demonstrated that they enjoy serving their brothers
and can help others in a kind way to learn and adhere
to Scriptural and theocratic direction. The local Branch
Committee invites potential students to submit an application. Graduates of this school are assigned to the ?eld or
to the branch o?ce in a foreign land or in their home country.
BETHEL SERVICE
19

Serving at Bethel is a special privilege. The name Bethel means “House of God,” and that designation is certainly appropriate for these centers of theocratic activity. Brothers and sisters in Bethel service do a vital work
in connection with producing, translating, and distributing
104

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

Bible literature. Their service Having spiritual
is invaluable to the Govern- goals will help
ing Body, which provides over- you to direct
sight and direction for congreyour energies
gations throughout the earth.
Many Bethelites who are trans- and other
lators live and work in areas of resources wisely
the branch territory where the
language they translate is spoken. This enables them to hear the language spoken in
everyday life. They can also see ?rsthand whether people
understand the language as it is used in the translated
publications.
20 Much of the work done at Bethel is physically demanding. For this reason, those called to Bethel are mainly dedicated, baptized brothers who are young, in good health,
and physically strong. If there is a need in the branch that
oversees your country and you would like to serve at Bethel, you can learn more about the requirements by attending the meeting for those interested in Bethel service that
is held at regional conventions. You can also ask the circuit overseer about Bethel service.
CONSTRUCTION SERVICE
21

The construction of theocratic facilities is a form of sacred service, similar to the work of constructing Solomon’s
temple. (1 Ki. 8:13-18) Many brothers and sisters show outstanding zeal by volunteering their time and assets to have
a part in this work.
22 Are you in a position to assist? If you are a baptized
publisher who is willing to share in such activity, the brothers overseeing construction in your area would appreciate
WAYS TO EXPAND YOUR MINISTRY

105

your help and are willing to train you even if you have limited skills. Why not let the local elders know that you are
available to help? Some baptized publishers who qualify
have even been in a position to volunteer for construction
work on theocratic facilities in other countries.
23 There are many opportunities to share in construction
service. Exemplary baptized publishers with some measure of skill who can support projects near their home may
serve as Local Design/Construction volunteers. Others are
able to support more distant projects for a limited period
of time and are appointed by the branch o?ce to serve
as construction volunteers for from two weeks to three
months. Those who are appointed to serve on a long-term
basis are called construction servants. A construction servant who is given a foreign assignment serves as an expatriate construction servant. A Construction Group made
up of construction servants and construction volunteers
takes the lead on each project and is assisted by Local
Design/Construction volunteers and volunteers from congregations involved in the project. Construction Groups
move from one project to the next within a branch territory.
WHAT ARE YOUR SPIRITUAL GOALS?
24

If you have dedicated your life to Jehovah, your desire is to serve Jehovah forever. But what are your spiritual goals along the way? Having spiritual goals will help you
to direct your energies and other resources wisely. (1 Cor.
9:26) Setting such goals promotes spiritual growth and will
help you to concentrate on the more important things as
you reach out for additional service privileges.—Phil. 1:10;
1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
106

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

25

The apostle Paul set a ?ne example for us to imitate
in our service to God. (1 Cor. 11:1) Paul exerted himself vigorously in Jehovah’s service. He recognized that Jehovah
had provided him with many opportunities. To the brothers in Corinth, Paul wrote: “A large door that leads to activity has been opened to me.” Is this not also true in our
case? Yes, there are many opportunities for us to serve
Jehovah in association with the congregation, especially in
preaching the Kingdom good news. But as in Paul’s case,
going through that “large door” involves contending with
“many opposers.” (1 Cor. 16:9) Paul was willing to discipline himself. Notice what he said: “I pummel my body and
lead it as a slave.” (1 Cor. 9:24-27) Are we of that same
mind?
26 Each one is encouraged to work toward theocratic
goals according to his personal circumstances in life. Many
are engaged in some form of full-time service today because they set theocratic goals early in life. Even while they
were yet children, they were encouraged by their parents
and others to do so. Thus, they have enjoyed a very rich
career in Jehovah’s service—with no regrets. (Prov. 10:22)
Other worthy goals might be that we participate in ?eld
service each week, start and conduct a home Bible study,
or take more time to prepare for meetings. The important
thing is that we remain steadfast and fully accomplish our
ministry. If we do, we will honor Jehovah and reach our ultimate goal, that of serving him forever.—Luke 13:24; 1 Tim.
4:7b, 8.

WAYS TO EXPAND YOUR MINISTRY

107

CHAPTER 11

Arrangements
for Places of Worship
TRUE worshippers of Jehovah are commanded to assemble
together to receive instruction and to encourage one another. (Heb. 10:23-25) The ?rst place of worship for God’s
chosen people, the Israelites, was “the tabernacle, the tent
of meeting.” (Ex. 39:32, 40) Later, David’s son Solomon
built a house, or temple, for God’s glory. (1 Ki. 9:3) After that temple was destroyed in 607 B.C.E., the Jews arranged to meet in buildings called synagogues to worship
God. In time, the temple was rebuilt, and once again it
served as a center of true worship. Jesus taught both in
synagogues and in the temple. (Luke 4:16; John 18:20) Jesus even held a meeting on a mountain.—Matt. 5:1–7:29.
2 After Jesus’ death, Christians assembled in public places
and in private homes to teach the Scriptures and to enjoy
association with fellow believers. (Acts 19:8, 9; Rom. 16:3, 5;
Col. 4:15; Philem. 2) Sometimes it was necessary for the early Christians to meet in isolated places to avoid detection by
persecutors. Indeed, faithful servants of God in the past had
a sincere desire to assemble in places of worship in order
to be “taught by Jehovah.”—Isa. 54:13.
3 Today, too, public places and private homes are used for
Christian meetings. Private homes often serve as places to
meet for ?eld service. Those who o?er their home for such
gatherings view this as a privilege. Many feel that they have
bene?ted spiritually by opening their home in this way.
108

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

KINGDOM HALL
4

The principal meeting place of Jehovah’s Witnesses is
the Kingdom Hall. Generally, property is purchased, and a
new Kingdom Hall is constructed or an existing building
is renovated. In order to save on costs and optimize the
use of our facilities, several congregations may be able to
share the use of a Kingdom Hall when practical. In some
localities, it is necessary to rent a hall. For new Kingdom
Halls and those that have had major renovations, it is appropriate to have a dedication program. However, if only
minor renovations are made to an existing Kingdom Hall,
there is no need to have a dedication program.
5 The Kingdom Hall should not be an elaborate building
made to impress others. While the design may vary from
place to place, the purpose is always functional. (Acts 17:
24) In accord with local circumstances, it should be a comfortable and convenient place for holding Christian meetings.
6 All congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses contribute toward the use, operation, and maintenance of the Kingdom
Hall to which they are assigned. No collections are taken;
nor are funds solicited. A contribution box is provided so
that those attending meetings may contribute for necessary expenses in connection with the use of the hall. They
do so willingly and from the heart.—2 Cor. 9:7.
7 All in the congregation consider it a privilege to support
the Kingdom Hall ?nancially and to volunteer their services
in keeping it clean and well-maintained. An elder or a ministerial servant is usually assigned to schedule this work.
Generally, cleaning is handled by ?eld service groups, with
the group overseer or his assistant taking the lead. Both
ARRANGEMENTS FOR PLACES OF WORSHIP

109

inside and out, the Kingdom Hall should properly represent
Jehovah and his organization.
8 Where more than one congregation meets in a hall, the
elders of the congregations involved set up a Kingdom Hall
Operating Committee, which will coordinate matters involving the building and property. The bodies of elders choose
a brother to be chairman. Working under the direction of
the bodies of elders, the operating committee monitors the
hall cleaning, making sure that the hall is well-maintained
and that su?cient supplies are on hand. This calls for close
cooperation among the congregations involved.
9 When several congregations use one Kingdom Hall, the
schedule of meeting times may involve rotation. The elders will work out this schedule in a spirit of mutual concern and brotherly love. (Phil. 2:2-4; 1 Pet. 3:8) No one
congregation would take it upon itself to make decisions
on behalf of the other congregations, although only one
congregation holds legal title to the hall. When the circuit
overseer visits one of the congregations using the Kingdom Hall, the other congregation(s) will adjust their meeting times as needed for that week.
10 The Kingdom Hall may be used for weddings and funerals with the permission of the Congregation Service
Committee. These elders carefully consider what is requested and base their decision on direction provided by
the branch o?ce.
11 Those who are granted use of the Kingdom Hall for
such purposes are expected to conduct themselves in a
way that be?ts genuine Christians. Nothing should be done
at the Kingdom Hall that would o?end the congregation or
bring reproach on Jehovah and the good name of the con110

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

gregation. (Phil. 2:14, 15) Under the direction of the branch
o?ce, the Kingdom Hall may be used for other spiritual
functions, such as the Kingdom Ministry School and the
Pioneer Service School.
12 The congregation will always treat its meeting place
with respect. Dress, grooming, and decorum should re?ect
the dignity associated with the worship of Jehovah. (Eccl.
5:1; 1 Tim. 2:9, 10) By applying counsel in this regard, we
show appreciation for our Christian meetings.
13 Maintaining order during meetings is important. It is
recommended that children sit with their parents. Parents
with young children can be encouraged to sit where they
will cause the least disturbance if it becomes necessary to
take the children out to discipline them or to care for other needs.
14 Quali?ed brothers are assigned to serve as attendants
at meetings in the Kingdom Hall. They should be alert and
friendly and use good judgment. Their responsibilities include greeting newcomers and making them feel welcome,
helping latecomers to ?nd seats, recording attendance ?gures, and giving necessary attention to proper heating and
ventilation of the hall. Where necessary, attendants will remind parents to give proper supervision so that children
will not run around before and after the meetings or play
on the platform. In a kind and tactful way, an attendant
might ask the parent of an unruly child to take the child out
so that the audience will not be overly distracted. The work
of the attendants contributes much to everyone’s enjoyment of the meetings. It is preferable that ministerial servants be used as attendants, particularly those who have
had experience handling situations that arise in family life.
—1 Tim. 3:12.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR PLACES OF WORSHIP

111

KINGDOM HALL CONSTRUCTION

All in the

15

In the ?rst century, some congregation
Christians were better o? ma- consider it a
terially than were others, so the privilege to support
apostle Paul wrote: “By means
the Kingdom Hall
of an equalizing, your surplus
?nancially and to
at the present time might o?set their need, so that their sur- volunteer their
plus might also o?set your de- services in keeping
?ciency, that there may be it clean and
an equalizing.” (2 Cor. 8:14) To- well-maintained
day, a similar “equalizing” takes
place. Funds contributed by
congregations worldwide are pooled to provide ?nancial assistance to build and renovate Kingdom Halls. The generous
support of the worldwide brotherhood is greatly appreciated by the organization and by the congregations that bene?t from these contributions.
16 Based on a region-wide plan, the branch o?ce assigns
congregations to speci?c Kingdom Halls. The branch also
determines when and where to construct new Kingdom
Halls and renovate existing halls in the branch territory.
When disasters occur, arrangements are made for needed
repairs to damaged Kingdom Halls and, on occasion, to the
homes of the brothers.
17 The branch coordinates the use of volunteers to help
with property acquisition, Kingdom Hall design, building
permits, construction, and maintenance. Because of the
great need for Kingdom Halls in most lands, many volunteers are needed. All baptized publishers who qualify and
desire to help are encouraged to complete an application
112

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

and give it to their local Congregation Service Committee.
Even unbaptized publishers may assist with the building or
renovating of their own Kingdom Hall.
ASSEMBLY HALLS
18

Early Christians generally met in small groups. However, sometimes “quite a crowd” assembled. (Acts 11:26)
Similarly, Jehovah’s people today meet in large gatherings
for circuit assemblies and regional conventions. Local facilities are often rented for this purpose, but where such
are not suitable or available, a place of worship called an
Assembly Hall may be acquired.
19 At times, a building is purchased, renovated, and used
as an Assembly Hall. More often, though, property is obtained and a new hall is built. Assembly Halls vary in size,
depending on local needs. The branch o?ce makes the decision to purchase or construct such a building only after
the cost has been carefully analyzed and the amount of
use determined.
20 Because of the size of some of these meeting places,
full-time servants are appointed by the branch to care
for the operation and maintenance of the Assembly Hall.
Arrangements are made for the circuits to do the regular cleaning, the semiannual cleaning, and the preventive
maintenance. It is bene?cial for the brothers to volunteer
to do this work. Therefore, congregations are encouraged
to support these arrangements wholeheartedly.—Ps. 110:3;
Mal. 1:10.
21 At times, the Assembly Hall may also be used for other theocratic functions, such as Bible schools and special
meetings for circuit overseers. Like the Kingdom Hall, an
Assembly Hall is a dedicated place of worship. When we
ARRANGEMENTS FOR PLACES OF WORSHIP

113

are meeting at an Assembly Hall, our conduct, dress, and
grooming should be digni?ed, just as when we are meeting at the Kingdom Hall for worship.
22 Many new ones are hastening to be part of God’s organization during the ?nal part of these last days. This is
evidence of Jehovah’s blessing. (Isa. 60:8, 10, 11, 22) Thus,
we want to support the arrangements to obtain and maintain clean and comfortable places of worship. In doing so,
we show our appreciation for the role that such facilities
play in helping us to encourage one another all the more
so as we see Jehovah’s day drawing near.

114

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CHAPTER 12

Supporting Kingdom Activity
Locally and Worldwide
IN FULFILLMENT of Jesus’ prophecy concerning the last
days, Jehovah’s Witnesses have carried the ministry of the
good news “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts
1:8; Matt. 24:14) To do this, they have freely given of their
time and energy in sharing spiritual things. Trusting in Jehovah to provide for his fellow workers, they continue to
put God’s Kingdom ?rst in their life. (Matt. 6:25-34; 1 Cor.
3:5-9) The results are clear evidence of Jehovah’s approval and blessing.
CARING FOR KINGDOM INTERESTS WORLDWIDE
2 When noting our preaching methods and realizing that
we distribute Bibles and Bible literature without charge to
the public, some will ask: “How is all of this possible?”
True, printing and producing Bibles and Bible literature
costs money. Constructing and maintaining Bethel homes
for ministers who operate printing presses, oversee the
preaching work, and serve in other ways to advance the
good news also costs money. In addition, circuit overseers,
?eld missionaries, special pioneers, and others in special
full-time service are given some material assistance to help
them continue in the work. Clearly, the work of preaching
the good news in our day, whether locally or worldwide, involves the outlay of large sums of money. Where does it
all come from?
3 Many who appreciate the Bible educational work of Jehovah’s Witnesses are happy to donate to the worldwide

SUPPORTING KINGDOM ACTIVITY LOCALLY AND WORLDWIDE

115

work. However, our work is primarily supported by the Witnesses themselves, some of whom send voluntary contributions to local branch o?ces of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
They demonstrate a willing spirit like that of God’s ancient
servants who generously supported the building of Jehovah’s place of worship. (Ex. 35:20-29; 1 Chron. 29:9) Some
gifts are received from estates through wills, while other
contributions come from individuals, congregations, and
circuits and are usually given in small amounts. Added together, these gifts provide the funds that keep the ministry going.
4 Jehovah’s Witnesses consider it a privilege to use their
money and other resources to advance the preaching
work. Jesus and his disciples maintained a money box
from which funds were taken to care for expenses. (John
13:29) The Bible tells us of women who ministered to Jesus
and his disciples. (Mark 15:40, 41; Luke 8:3) The apostle
Paul gratefully accepted material assistance lovingly provided by those who were interested in advancing the good
news and who wished to have a share in his ministry. (Phil.
4:14-16; 1 Thess. 2:9) Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to follow these ancient patterns of zealous service and generous
giving. Thus, it is possible for honesthearted ones everywhere to be o?ered “life’s water free.”—Rev. 22:17.
CARING FOR THE NEEDS
OF THE LOCAL CONGREGATION
5

The expenses of the local congregation are also covered by voluntary contributions. No collections are taken; nor is there an assessment of dues or a solicitation of
money. Contribution boxes are provided at meeting places
116

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

so that each person can have a part in giving “just as he
has resolved in his heart.”—2 Cor. 9:7.
6 Money contributed is ?rst of all used to pay for the operation and upkeep of the Kingdom Hall. The body of elders may decide that some of the money could be sent to
the local branch o?ce of Jehovah’s Witnesses for use in
furthering the worldwide work. A resolution to this e?ect
would be adopted by the congregation. In this way, many
congregations make regular contributions to the worldwide
work. When all are alert to local needs that arise from time
to time, frequent announcements regarding contributions
should not be necessary.
HANDLING CONTRIBUTIONS
7 After each meeting, two brothers who have been assigned by the body of elders remove any money that has
been deposited in the contribution boxes and make a record of it. (2 Ki. 12:9, 10; 2 Cor. 8:20) The body of elders will
make appropriate arrangements for safeguarding these
funds until they can be forwarded to the branch o?ce or
used for congregation needs. This may require the opening of a congregation bank account. The brother handling
the congregation accounts prepares a monthly statement
to inform the congregation, and every three months the
coordinator of the body of elders arranges for an audit of
the accounts.

FINANCING CIRCUIT ASSEMBLIES
8

Expenses incurred in operating assemblies are covered
by contributions from the Witnesses making up the circuit.
Contribution boxes are provided at the assembly facility so
that voluntary contributions can be made to the circuit. A
SUPPORTING KINGDOM ACTIVITY LOCALLY AND WORLDWIDE

117

brother selected by the circuit overseer handles the circuit
accounts.
9 Ideally, each assembly pays the expenses incurred, with
surplus funds being deposited in the circuit account. If
there is a de?cit at the end of an assembly and circuit
funds can cover it, there is no need to write the congregations regarding the di?erence. However, if there are not
enough funds in the circuit account to pay expenses for
the assembly or to meet initial expenses for the next assembly, such as a deposit to secure the use of a facility, the
circuit overseer may direct that congregations be advised
of the privilege to contribute. Each body of elders will discuss the matter and determine what contribution the congregation would be able to make to the circuit fund. They
would then handle this contribution by means of a resolution.
10 When meeting together in connection with an assembly, the elders decide what should be done with the funds
that the circuit has at its disposal. Decisions are made regarding assembly operating expenses, purchase of circuit
equipment, and expenses incurred by the circuit overseer
or the branch representative. Consideration may be given
to making donations to the worldwide work, the worldwide
Kingdom Hall construction, a local Assembly Hall, or some
other important need.
11 All decisions other than those involving recurring operating expenses should be handled as resolutions adopted by the elders. These resolutions must be written in exact amounts and presented for approval each time circuit
funds are dispensed. Funds belonging to the circuit may
be sent to the branch o?ce for safekeeping until the circuit
118

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

needs them. The circuit overseer will arrange for an audit
of the circuit accounts following each circuit assembly.
CARING FOR THE POOR
12

Jehovah’s
Witnesses consider
it a privilege to use
their money and
other resources to
advance the
preaching work

One purpose of the money
box maintained by Jesus and
his disciples was to help the
poor. (Mark 14:3-5; John 13:29)
That Christian responsibility has continued, for Jesus said:
“You always have the poor with you.” (Mark 14:7) How do
Jehovah’s Witnesses care for this responsibility today?
13 At times, faithful ones in the congregation may be in
need of material assistance because of advanced age, in?rmity, or some adversity beyond their control. Family
members, relatives, and others who become aware of such
a need may feel moved to help. This is in harmony with the
words of the apostle John: “Whoever has the material possessions of this world and sees his brother in need and
yet refuses to show him compassion, in what way does the
love of God remain in him? Little children, we should love,
not in word or with the tongue, but in deed and truth.”
(1 John 3:17, 18; 2 Thess. 3:6-12) True worship includes
looking after faithful ones who may be in need of material assistance.—Jas. 1:27; 2:14-17.
14 In his ?rst letter to Timothy, the apostle Paul explained
how material assistance may be provided to deserving
ones. You can read his counsel at 1 Timothy 5:3-21. The
primary responsibility rests with each Christian to
care for the needs of his own household. Older or in?rm
SUPPORTING KINGDOM ACTIVITY LOCALLY AND WORLDWIDE

119

ones should receive assistance from their children, grandchildren, or other close relatives. At times, material assistance is available through governmental or social programs, so relatives or others may help the needy one to
apply for such assistance. A situation might arise in which
it becomes necessary for the congregation as a whole
to consider providing some form of assistance to certain
needy brothers and sisters who have a long history of
faithful service. If there are no family members or other
relatives to assist such ones and no adequate assistance
from government agencies is available, the body of elders
can make appropriate recommendations to provide some
help. Christians consider it a privilege to share their material possessions with those in need.
15 Many brothers and sisters may come to be in need because of persecution, wars, earthquakes, ?oods, famines,
or other calamitous occurrences that are common in these
critical times. (Matt. 24:7-9) Local congregations may not
have anything to share with one another, so the Governing Body coordinates the e?orts of brothers elsewhere to
provide what is needed. This is similar to the way Christians in Asia Minor provided food for the brothers in Judea during a time of famine. (1 Cor. 16:1-4; 2 Cor. 9:1-5) By
following their example, we con?rm our love for our brothers and show ourselves to be genuine disciples of Jesus
Christ.—John 13:35.
LITERATURE DISTRIBUTION
16

Bibles and Bible literature play an important role in
spreading the Kingdom message. Usually a ministerial servant is assigned by the body of elders to look after the
congregation’s supply of literature, and another is assigned
120

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

to care for magazines. The brothers assigned to look after these supplies take their responsibilities seriously. They
keep good records so that adequate supplies are on hand
to care for the needs of the congregation.
17 As dedicated Christians, we recognize that our time,
mental and physical assets, talents and material possessions, even our very life are gifts from God and intended
for use in his service. (Luke 17:10; 1 Cor. 4:7) By making
proper use of all our resources, we demonstrate the depth
of our love for Jehovah. It is our desire to honor Jehovah
with our valuable things, knowing that he is pleased with
any gift that is given as an expression of whole-souled devotion. (Prov. 3:9; Mark 14:3-9; Luke 21:1-4; Col. 3:23, 24)
Jesus said: “You received free, give free.” (Matt. 10:8) As
we give of ourselves and our resources in Jehovah’s service, we in turn receive the greater joy.—Acts 20:35.

SUPPORTING KINGDOM ACTIVITY LOCALLY AND WORLDWIDE

121

CHAPTER 13

“Do All Things for God’s Glory”
AS God’s dedicated servants, we are under obligation to
re?ect Jehovah’s glory in all that we say and do. The
apostle Paul o?ered a guiding principle when he wrote:
“Whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything
else, do all things for God’s glory.” (1 Cor. 10:31) This
involves our holding to Jehovah’s righteous standards,
which are a re?ection of his own perfect personality. (Col.
3:10) We must become imitators of God, as a holy people.—Eph. 5:1, 2.
2 Calling this to the attention of Christians, the apostle Peter wrote: “As obedient children, stop being molded by the desires you formerly had in your ignorance,
but like the Holy One who called you, become holy yourselves in all your conduct, for it is written: ‘You must be
holy, because I am holy.’ ” (1 Pet. 1:14-16) As in Israel of
old, members of the Christian congregation are required
to maintain holiness. This means that they are to remain
untarnished, clean from sinful contamination and worldliness. They are thus set apart for sacred service.—Ex.
20:5.
3 Holiness is maintained by adhering to Jehovah’s laws
and principles, which are clearly set out in the Holy Scriptures. (2 Tim. 3:16) Through a study of the Bible, we were
taught about Jehovah and his ways, and we were drawn
to him. Our study convinced us of the need to seek ?rst
God’s Kingdom and to make the doing of Jehovah’s will
paramount in our life. (Matt. 6:33; Rom. 12:2) This required that we put on the new personality.—Eph. 4:22-24.
122

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

SPIRITUAL AND MORAL CLEANNESS
4

Holding to Jehovah’s righteous standards is not always
easy. Our adversary, Satan the Devil, seeks to turn us aside
from the truth. This world’s wicked in?uences and our own
sinful tendencies make things di?cult at times. Living up
to our dedication requires a spiritual ?ght on our part. The
Scriptures tell us not to be surprised when we encounter
opposition or trials. We will have to su?er for the sake of
righteousness. (2 Tim. 3:12) We can be happy when undergoing trials, knowing that such trials are proof that we are
doing God’s will.—1 Pet. 3:14-16; 4:12, 14-16.
5 Though Jesus was perfect, he learned obedience by the
things he su?ered. At no time did he yield to Satan’s temptations or develop worldly aspirations. (Matt. 4:1-11; John
6:15) Not once did Jesus even give thought to a compromise. Although his faithful course incurred the world’s hatred, he held to Jehovah’s righteous standards. Shortly before his death, Jesus warned his disciples that the world
would hate them too. From that time forward, Jesus’ followers have experienced tribulation, but they have taken
courage in knowing that the Son of God conquered the
world.—John 15:19; 16:33; 17:16.
6 In order to be no part of the world, we need to uphold Jehovah’s righteous standards, as our Master did. In
addition to avoiding involvement with the world’s political
and social issues, we must resist its degraded moral climate. We take seriously the counsel found at James 1:21:
“Put away all ?lthiness and every trace of badness, and accept with mildness the implanting of the word that is able
to save you.” Through study and meeting attendance, we
can experience “the implanting of the word” of truth in our
“DO ALL THINGS FOR GOD’S GLORY”

123

mind and heart, and we will not even begin to desire what
the world o?ers. The disciple James wrote: “Do you not
know that friendship with the world is enmity with God?
Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of the world is
making himself an enemy of God.” (Jas. 4:4) For this reason, the Bible contains strong admonition that we hold to
Jehovah’s righteous standards and remain separate from
the world.
7 God’s Word warns us against sharing in shameful and
immoral conduct. It tells us: “Let sexual immorality and
every sort of uncleanness or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as is proper for holy people.” (Eph.
5:3) So we must refuse to allow our mind to dwell on things
that are obscene, shameful, or base, and we would certainly not allow such things to creep into our conversation. Thereby we give proof of wanting to hold to Jehovah’s
clean and righteous standards of morality.
PHYSICAL CLEANLINESS
8 Along with spiritual and moral cleanness, Christians
recognize the importance of being physically clean. In ancient Israel, the God of holiness required that the camp be
kept clean. We too must be clean so that Jehovah “does
not see anything indecent” in us.—Deut. 23:14.
9 Holiness and physical cleanliness are closely linked in
the Bible. For example, Paul wrote: “Beloved ones, let us
cleanse ourselves of every de?lement of ?esh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Cor. 7:1) Christian men and women, therefore, should strive to keep
their bodies clean by regularly bathing and by washing their clothes. While conditions vary from country to
country, we can generally ?nd enough soap and water

124

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

to keep our bodies clean and As God’s dedicated
to make sure that our children servants, we are
are kept clean.
under obligation to
10 Because of our witnessre?ect Jehovah’s
ing activity, we are usually
well-known in the community glory in all that we
where we live. Keeping a neat, say and do
clean, and orderly home, inside and out, is in itself a witness to the neighbors. This is something in which the whole
family can be involved. Brothers should take particular interest in the home and its surroundings, knowing that a
tidy yard and well-kept home make a favorable impression
on others. This, along with their taking the lead in spiritual matters, is an indication that family heads are presiding well over their own household. (1 Tim. 3:4, 12) Sisters
too have a responsibility to care for things, especially inside the home. (Titus 2:4, 5) Well-trained children do their
part in keeping themselves as well as their rooms neat and
clean. Thus the family works together in developing patterns of cleanliness that will ?t in with the new world under God’s Kingdom.
11 Many of Jehovah’s people today use automobiles for
transportation to meetings. In some areas, a car is practically indispensable for the ministry. The car should be
kept clean and in good repair. Our homes and automobiles
should testify that we are part of Jehovah’s clean and holy
people. The same principle applies to our witnessing case
and Bible.
12 Our dress and grooming should be in keeping with
godly principles. We would not think of appearing before
a prominent person if we were slovenly dressed or our
“DO ALL THINGS FOR GOD’S GLORY”

125

clothes were too casual. How much more concerned we
should be when representing Jehovah in the ?eld ministry or on the platform! Our grooming and clothing styles
can in?uence how others view the worship of Jehovah. It
would certainly not be ?tting to be immodest or inconsiderate of others. (Mic. 6:8; 1 Cor. 10:31-33; 1 Tim. 2:9, 10)
Hence, when we are getting ready to go in service or to
go to congregation meetings, circuit assemblies, or larger
conventions, we should have in mind what the Scriptures
say about physical cleanliness and modest appearance. We
always want to honor and glorify Jehovah.
13 The same would apply when we visit world headquarters or a branch o?ce of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Remember, the name Bethel means “House of God.” Therefore, we
should dress and conduct ourselves as we would when we
attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
14 Even when engaging in leisure activities, we want to
give attention to our dress and grooming. We might ask
ourselves, ‘Would I be embarrassed to witness informally
because of the way I am dressed?’
WHOLESOME RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT
15 Rest and recreation are necessary for staying balanced
and healthy. Once Jesus invited his disciples to come with
him to a lonely place to “rest up a little.” (Mark 6:31) Rest
as well as wholesome recreation or entertainment can provide some pleasant diversion. It can refresh us so that we
can press ahead with our normal work.
16 With so many forms of recreation available today,
Christians need to be selective, exercising godly wisdom in
what they do. While recreation has its place, it is not the
big thing in life. We are warned that in “the last days,” men

126

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

would be “lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.”
(2 Tim. 3:1, 4) Much of what is called recreation and entertainment is objectionable to those who desire to hold to
Jehovah’s righteous standards.
17 The early Christians had to resist the unwholesome environment in the pleasure-seeking world around them. At
the Roman circus, spectators were entertained by viewing the su?erings of others. Violence, bloodshed, and sexual immorality were staged for the amusement of the populace, but the early Christians stayed away from such
things. Today, much of the world’s entertainment features
similar elements and caters to base human appetites. We
need to “keep strict watch” on how we walk, turning away
from demoralizing entertainment. (Eph. 5:15, 16; Ps. 11:5)
And even if the entertainment itself may not be objectionable, the general atmosphere may be unacceptable.—1 Pet.
4:1-4.
18 There are wholesome forms of recreation and entertainment that Christians can enjoy. Many have bene?ted
from following the Scriptural counsel and balanced suggestions that can be found in our publications.
19 At times, several families may be invited to a home for
Christian fellowship. Or brothers and sisters may be invited
to attend a wedding reception or a similar social occasion.
(John 2:2) The hosts should feel personally responsible for
what takes place. Clearly, there is need for caution when
large groups get together. The relaxed atmosphere at such
gatherings has led some to go beyond the limits of proper Christian conduct, becoming involved in excessive eating and drinking and even other serious wrongdoing. With
this in mind, discerning Christians have seen the wisdom
“DO ALL THINGS FOR GOD’S GLORY”

127

of limiting the size and duration of such gatherings. If alcoholic beverages are served, they should be used in moderation. (Phil. 4:5) If every e?ort is made to ensure that gettogethers are wholesome and spiritually refreshing, food
and drink will not be the most important consideration.
20 It is a ?ne thing to be hospitable. (1 Pet. 4:9) When
inviting other Christians to our home for a meal, refreshments, relaxation, and fellowship, we want to keep in mind
those who may be disadvantaged. (Luke 14:12-14) If we
are guests on such occasions, our conduct should be in
line with the counsel found at Mark 12:31. It is always good
to show appreciation for the kindness of others.
21 Christians rejoice in God’s bounteous gifts and in
knowing that they can “eat and drink and ?nd enjoyment
for all [their] hard work.” (Eccl. 3:12, 13) When we “do all
things for God’s glory,” hosts as well as guests can look
back on social gatherings with the satisfaction of having
been spiritually refreshed.
SCHOOL ACTIVITIES
22 Children of Jehovah’s Witnesses bene?t from getting a
basic secular education. While attending school, they are
interested in learning to read and write well. Other subjects
taught in school can be of value to young people as they
pursue spiritual goals. During their school years, they will
want to make a diligent e?ort to ‘remember their Grand
Creator’ by putting spiritual things ?rst.—Eccl. 12:1.
23 If you are a Christian youth attending school, take care
not to associate unnecessarily with worldly youths. (2 Tim.
3:1, 2) Because Jehovah has provided the necessary protection, there is much you can do to ward o? worldly in-

128

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

?uences. (Ps. 23:4; 91:1, 2) So to safeguard yourself, take
advantage of Jehovah’s provisions.—Ps. 23:5.
24 To keep separate from the world while they are
in school, most young Witnesses choose not to participate in extracurricular activities. This may be di?cult for
classmates and teachers to understand. However, pleasing
God is what counts. It means that you will exercise your
Bible-trained conscience and be resolved not to become
involved in worldly competition or nationalism. (Gal. 5:19,
26) By listening to the Scriptural counsel of godly parents
and taking advantage of the good association in the congregation, you young ones can hold to Jehovah’s righteous
standards.
SECULAR WORK AND ASSOCIATES
25 Family heads have a Scriptural obligation to provide for
their household. (1 Tim. 5:8) Even so, as ministers they
recognize that their secular work is secondary to the pursuit of Kingdom interests. (Matt. 6:33; Rom. 11:13) By practicing godly devotion and being content with food and
clothing, they avoid the anxieties and snares of a materialistic way of life.—1 Tim. 6:6-10.
26 All dedicated Christians who work secularly should
have Scriptural principles in mind. Making honest provision
for ourselves means that we refuse to engage in practices
that violate God’s law or the law of the land. (Rom. 13:1,
2; 1 Cor. 6:9, 10) We keep in mind the dangers of bad associations. As soldiers of Christ, we refrain from engaging in
commercial endeavors that violate godly standards, compromise our Christian neutrality, or jeopardize our spirituality. (Isa. 2:4; 2 Tim. 2:4) And we do not have connections

“DO ALL THINGS FOR GOD’S GLORY”

129

with God’s religious enemy, “Babylon the Great.”—Rev. 18:
2, 4; 2 Cor. 6:14-17.
27 Adhering to God’s righteous standards will prevent us
from using our theocratic association to promote business
ventures or other personal interests. The purpose of our
association with others at Christian meetings, assemblies,
and conventions is exclusively to worship Jehovah. We are
feeding at his spiritual table and enjoying “an interchange
of encouragement.” (Rom. 1:11, 12; Heb. 10:24, 25) Such
association should be kept on a spiritual level.
DWELLING IN CHRISTIAN UNITY
28

Jehovah’s righteous standards also require that his
people “maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.” (Eph. 4:1-3) Rather than seeking to
please himself, each one seeks to pursue what is good
toward others. (1 Thess. 5:15) This is no doubt the spirit you have found in your congregation. No matter what
our racial, national, social, economic, or educational background may be, all of us are governed by the same righteous standards. Even outsiders have observed this outstanding characteristic of Jehovah’s people.—1 Pet. 2:12.
29 Further emphasizing the basis for unity, the apostle
Paul wrote: “One body there is, and one spirit, just as
you were called to the one hope of your calling; one Lord,
one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is
over all and through all and in all.” (Eph. 4:4-6) This calls
for unity in understanding basic Bible doctrines as well
as more advanced Bible teachings in recognition of Jehovah’s sovereignty. Truly, Jehovah has given his people the
pure language of truth, enabling them to serve shoulder to
shoulder.—Zeph. 3:9.
130

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

30

The unity and peace of the Christian congregation is
a source of refreshment for all who worship Jehovah. We
have experienced the ful?llment of Jehovah’s promise: “In
unity I will place them, like sheep in the pen.” (Mic. 2:12)
We want to maintain that peaceful unity by holding to Jehovah’s righteous standards.
31 Happy are those who have been accepted into the
clean congregation of Jehovah! To be called by Jehovah’s
name is worth every sacri?ce we may have to make. As we
maintain our precious relationship with Jehovah, we will diligently strive to hold to his righteous standards and to recommend them to others.—2 Cor. 3:18.

“DO ALL THINGS FOR GOD’S GLORY”

131

CHAPTER 14

Maintaining the Peace and
Cleanness of the Congregation
EACH year thousands of people ?ock to Jehovah’s house
of pure worship, in ful?llment of Bible prophecy. (Mic. 4:
1, 2) How happy we are to receive them into “the congregation of God”! (Acts 20:28) They appreciate the opportunity to serve Jehovah with us and to enjoy the clean and
peaceful environment of our spiritual paradise. God’s holy
spirit and the wise counsel found in his Word help us to
maintain peace and keep the congregation clean.—Ps. 119:
105; Zech. 4:6.
2 By applying Bible principles, we put on “the new personality.” (Col. 3:10) We put aside petty disputes and personal di?erences. Viewing matters as Jehovah does, we overcome divisive worldly in?uences and work unitedly as an
international brotherhood.—Acts 10:34, 35.
3 Nevertheless, from time to time, di?culties arise that
a?ect the peace and unity of the congregation. What is the
cause? In most cases, it is a failure to apply Bible counsel.
We still have to cope with our imperfect human tendencies.
Not one of us is without sin. (1 John 1:10) Someone may
take a false step that could introduce moral or spiritual uncleanness into the congregation. We may o?end someone
by our thoughtless words or deeds, or we may be stumbled
because of what someone has said or done. (Rom. 3:23)
At times like these, what can we do to set matters straight?
4 Jehovah has lovingly taken all of this into consideration.
His Word provides counsel on what to do when di?culties
132

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

arise. Personal assistance is available from loving spiritual
shepherds, the elders. By applying their Scriptural counsel,
we can regain a ?ne relationship with others and maintain
a good standing with Jehovah. If we receive discipline or
reproof because of some wrongdoing on our part, we can
be sure that such correction is an expression of our heavenly Father’s love for us.—Prov. 3:11, 12; Heb. 12:6.
SETTLING MINOR DIFFERENCES
5

There may be times when personal disputes or di?culties of a minor nature arise between members of the congregation. These should quickly be settled in a spirit of
brotherly love. (Eph. 4:26; Phil. 2:2-4; Col. 3:12-14) Very
likely, you will ?nd that problems of a personal nature involving your relationship with a member of the congregation can be resolved by applying the apostle Peter’s counsel to “have intense love for one another, because love
covers a multitude of sins.” (1 Pet. 4:8) The Bible says: “We
all stumble many times.” (Jas. 3:2) By applying the Golden Rule, doing to others all things that we want them to
do to us, we can usually forgive and forget minor o?enses.
—Matt. 6:14, 15; 7:12.
6 If you discern that someone was o?ended by what
you said or did, you should take the initiative to make
peace without delay. Remember, your relationship with
Jehovah is also a?ected. Jesus counseled his disciples:
“If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and there
you remember that your brother has something against
you, leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go
away. First make your peace with your brother, and then
come back and o?er your gift.” (Matt. 5:23, 24) There
may have been a misunderstanding. If so, open up the
MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

133

lines of communication. Good communication among all in
the congregation goes a long way toward preventing misunderstandings and solving problems that arise because of
human imperfection.
PROVIDING NEEDED SCRIPTURAL COUNSEL
7 At times, overseers may ?nd it necessary to give counsel in order to readjust a person’s thinking. This is not always easy. To the Christians in Galatia, the apostle Paul
wrote: “Brothers, even if a man takes a false step before
he is aware of it, you who have spiritual quali?cations try
to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness.”—Gal. 6:1.
8 By shepherding the ?ock, overseers can protect the
congregation from many spiritual dangers and may prevent serious problems from developing. Elders strive to
make their service to the congregation measure up to what
Jehovah promised through Isaiah: “Each one will be like a
hiding place from the wind, a place of concealment from
the rainstorm, like streams of water in a waterless land,
like the shadow of a massive crag in a parched land.”—Isa.
32:2.

MARKING DISORDERLY ONES
9

The apostle Paul warned of certain ones who could exert an unhealthy in?uence on the congregation. Paul said:
“We are giving you instructions . . . to withdraw from every
brother who is walking disorderly and not according to
the tradition that you received from us.” He clari?ed that
statement by writing: “If anyone is not obedient to our
word through this letter, keep this one marked and stop
associating with him, so that he may become ashamed.
And yet do not consider him an enemy, but continue
134

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

admonishing him as a broth- By maintaining
er.”—2 Thess. 3:6, 14, 15.
the peace and
10 Occasionally, someone not
cleanness of the
guilty of practicing a grave sin
congregation, we
for which he could be expelled
from the congregation shows continue to let our
?agrant disregard for God’s light of Kingdom
standard that should govern truth shine
Christians. This could include
such things as being extremely lazy, critical, or dirty. He could be “meddling with what
does not concern [him].” (2 Thess. 3:11) Or he might be
one who schemes to take material advantage of others or
indulges in entertainment that is clearly improper. The disorderly conduct is serious enough to re?ect badly on the
congregation, and it has the potential to spread to other
Christians.
11 The elders will ?rst try to help a disorderly person by
giving him Bible-based counsel. However, if the individual
persists in disregarding Bible principles in spite of repeated admonition, the elders may decide that a warning talk
should be given to the congregation. Elders will use discernment in determining whether a particular situation is
su?ciently serious and disturbing to others to warrant a
warning talk. The speaker will provide appropriate counsel
concerning disorderly conduct, but he will not name the
disorderly one. Consequently, those who are aware of the
situation described in the talk will take care to avoid socializing with such an individual, although they will continue spiritual association, “admonishing him as a brother.”
12 Hopefully, the ?rm stand taken by faithful members of
the congregation will help the disorderly one to become
MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

135

ashamed of his ways and will move him to change. When
it is clearly evident that the individual has abandoned his
disorderly course, it is no longer necessary to treat him as
a marked individual.
RESOLVING CERTAIN SERIOUS WRONGS
13

Willingness to overlook o?enses and to forgive does
not mean that we are unconcerned about wrongdoing or
that we approve of it. Not all wrongs can be charged to
inherited imperfection; nor is it proper to overlook wrongs
that go beyond minor o?enses. (Lev. 19:17; Ps. 141:5) The
Law covenant recognized that some sins are more serious
than others, and the same is true in the Christian arrangement.—1 John 5:16, 17.
14 Jesus outlined a speci?c procedure for solving serious
problems that may arise between fellow Christians. Note
the steps that he set out: “If your brother commits a sin,
[1] go and reveal his fault between you and him alone. If
he listens to you, you have gained your brother. But if he
does not listen, [2] take along with you one or two more,
so that on the testimony of two or three witnesses every
matter may be established. If he does not listen to them,
[3] speak to the congregation. If he does not listen even
to the congregation, let him be to you just as a man of
the nations and as a tax collector.”—Matt. 18:15-17.
15 In view of the illustration that Jesus subsequently gave,
recorded at Matthew 18:23-35, it appears that one of the
sins considered at Matthew 18:15-17 involves ?nancial or
property matters, such as failing to repay a loan or committing fraud. Or the o?ense might be slander, which seriously a?ects someone’s reputation.
136

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

16

If you have evidence that someone in the congregation has committed such a sin against you, do not be hasty
to turn to the elders, asking them to intervene on your behalf. As Jesus counseled, speak ?rst with the one against
whom you have the complaint. Try to resolve the matter
between just the two of you without involving anyone else.
Keep in mind that Jesus did not say ‘go only once and reveal his fault.’ Therefore, if the person did not admit the
wrong and ask forgiveness, it may be good to consider approaching him again later. If the matter can be resolved in
this way, the one who sinned will certainly appreciate that
you have not told others about his sin or marred his good
reputation in the congregation. You will have “gained your
brother.”
17 If the one who committed the o?ense accepts responsibility, seeks forgiveness, and takes steps to right the
wrong, there is no need to carry the matter further. Although the sin was serious, an o?ense of this kind can be
settled between the individuals involved.
18 If you are not able to gain your brother by revealing
his fault “between you and him alone,” then you may do
as Jesus said, “take along with you one or two more,” and
speak with your brother again. Those whom you take with
you should also have the objective of gaining your brother.
Preferably, they would be witnesses of the alleged wrongdoing, but if there are no eyewitnesses, you may choose
to ask one or two more to be witnesses to the discussion.
They may have experience in the matter at issue and may
be able to establish whether what occurred was truly a
wrong. Elders chosen to act as witnesses do not represent
the congregation, since the body of elders has not specifically assigned them to do so.
MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

137

19

If the matter has not been resolved after repeated efforts—you spoke with him alone and you went to him with
one or two others—and you feel that you cannot let it
pass, then you should report the matter to the overseers
of the congregation. Remember that their goal is to maintain the peace and cleanness of the congregation. Having
approached the elders, you will want to leave the matter in
their hands and trust in Jehovah. Never should you allow
the conduct of someone else to stumble you or to rob you
of your joy in Jehovah’s service.—Ps. 119:165.
20 The shepherds of the ?ock will investigate the matter.
If it becomes evident that the person has indeed committed a serious sin against you and is unrepentant and
unwilling to make reasonable and appropriate amends, it
may be necessary for a committee of overseers to expel
the wrongdoer from the congregation. Thus they protect
the ?ock and safeguard the cleanness of the congregation.
—Matt. 18:17.
HANDLING CASES OF SERIOUS WRONGDOING
21

Some serious o?enses, such as sexual immorality,
adultery, homosexuality, blasphemy, apostasy, idolatry,
and similar gross sins, require more than forgiveness from
an o?ended individual. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10; Gal. 5:19-21) Because the spiritual and moral cleanness of the congregation are threatened, such serious sins must be reported to
the elders and handled by them. (1 Cor. 5:6; Jas. 5:14, 15)
Some individuals may approach the elders either to confess their own sin or to report what they know regarding
the wrongdoing of others. (Lev. 5:1; Jas. 5:16) Regardless
of the manner in which the elders ?rst hear reports of serious wrongdoing on the part of a baptized member of the
138

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

congregation, an initial investigation will be made by two
elders. If it is established that there is substance to the report and that evidence is available showing that a serious
sin has been committed, the body of elders will assign a judicial committee of at least three elders to handle the matter.
22 The elders exercise watchful care over the ?ock, seeking to protect it from any elements that would be spiritually damaging. They also endeavor to use God’s Word skillfully to reprove any who have erred and to restore them
to spiritual health. (Jude 21-23) This is in harmony with instructions given to Timothy by the apostle Paul, who wrote:
“I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who
is to judge the living and the dead, . . . Reprove, reprimand,
exhort, with all patience and art of teaching.” (2 Tim. 4:
1, 2) Doing so may take much time, but this is part of
the hard work of the elders. The congregation appreciates
their e?orts and considers them “worthy of double honor.”
—1 Tim. 5:17.
23 In every situation where guilt is established, the primary endeavor of the overseers is to restore the wrongdoer to spiritual health. If he is genuinely repentant and
they are able to help him, their administering of reproof,
either in private or before any possible witnesses who testi?ed during the judicial hearing, will serve to discipline
him and instill wholesome fear in the onlookers. (2 Sam.
12:13; 1 Tim. 5:20) In all cases of judicial reproof, restrictions are imposed. Thus the wrongdoer may be helped to
make “straight paths” for his feet thereafter. (Heb. 12:13)
In due course, the restrictions are removed as the individual’s spiritual recovery becomes manifest.
MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

139

ANNOUNCEMENT OF REPROOF
24

If a judicial committee determines that an individual is
repentant but that the matter is likely to become known
in the congregation or in the community or if the congregation needs to be on guard concerning the repentant
wrongdoer, a simple announcement will be made during
the Life and Ministry Meeting. It should read: “[Name of
person] has been reproved.” The coordinator of the body
of elders should approve this announcement.
IF THE DECISION IS TO DISFELLOWSHIP
25

In some cases, the wrongdoer will have become hardened in his course of sinful conduct and will thus fail to respond to e?orts to help him. Su?cient “works that be?t
repentance” may not be in evidence at the time of the
judicial hearing. (Acts 26:20) What then? In such cases,
it is necessary to expel the unrepentant wrongdoer from
the congregation, thus denying him fellowship with Jehovah’s clean people. The bad in?uence of the wrongdoer
is removed from the congregation, thereby safeguarding
its moral and spiritual cleanness and protecting its good
name. (Deut. 21:20, 21; 22:23, 24) Upon becoming aware
of the shameful conduct of a member of the congregation in Corinth, the apostle Paul admonished the elders to
“hand such a man over to Satan . . . , so that the spirit [of the congregation] may be saved.” (1 Cor. 5:5, 11-13)
Paul also reported the disfellowshipping of others who had
rebelled against the truth in the ?rst century.—1 Tim. 1:20.
26 When it has been determined that an unrepentant
wrongdoer should be disfellowshipped, a judicial committee should let the person know of the decision, clearly stating the Scriptural reason(s) for the disfellowshipping. Upon
140

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

informing the wrongdoer of the decision, the judicial committee should tell him that if he believes that a serious
error in judgment has been made and he wishes to appeal the decision, he should do so in writing, clearly stating the reasons for his appeal. Counting from the time he
was noti?ed of the committee’s decision, he will be given seven days for this. If a written appeal is received, the
body of elders will contact the circuit overseer, who will select quali?ed elders to serve on an appeal committee to
rehear the case. They will make every e?ort to conduct the
appeal hearing within one week after the written appeal is
received. If there is an appeal, announcement of the disfellowshipping will be postponed. In the meantime, the accused person will be restricted from commenting and praying at meetings and from special privileges of service.
27 An appeal is granted as a kindness to the accused and
allows him a further hearing of his concerns. Thus, if the
wrongdoer deliberately fails to appear at the appeal hearing, the disfellowshipping should be announced after reasonable e?orts have been made to contact him.
28 If the wrongdoer does not wish to appeal, the judicial
committee will explain to him the need for repentance as
well as what steps he can take toward being reinstated in
due time. This would be both helpful and kind and should
be done in hopes that he will change his ways and in time
qualify to return to Jehovah’s organization.—2 Cor. 2:6, 7.
ANNOUNCEMENT OF DISFELLOWSHIPPING
29

When it is necessary to disfellowship an unrepentant
wrongdoer from the congregation, a brief announcement
is made, stating: “[Name of person] is no longer one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” There is no need to elaborate. This will
MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

141

alert faithful members of the congregation to stop associating with that person. (1 Cor. 5:11) The coordinator of the
body of elders should approve this announcement.
DISASSOCIATION
30

The term “disassociation” applies to the action taken
by a person who is a baptized member of the congregation
but deliberately repudiates his Christian standing by stating that he no longer wants to be recognized as, or known
as, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Or he might renounce his
place in the Christian congregation by his actions, such as
by becoming part of a secular organization that has objectives contrary to Bible teachings and therefore is under
judgment by Jehovah God.—Isa. 2:4; Rev. 19:17-21.
31 Concerning those who renounced their Christian faith
in his day, the apostle John wrote: “They went out from
us, but they were not of our sort; for if they had been of
our sort, they would have remained with us.”—1 John 2:19.
32 When a person is disassociated, his situation before
Jehovah is far di?erent from that of an inactive Christian, one who no longer shares in the ?eld ministry. A person may have become inactive because he failed to study
God’s Word regularly. Or perhaps he experienced personal problems or persecution and lost his zeal for serving Jehovah. The elders as well as others in the congregation will
continue to render appropriate spiritual assistance to an
inactive Christian.—Rom. 15:1; 1 Thess. 5:14; Heb. 12:12.
33 In contrast, if a person who is a Christian chooses to
disassociate himself, a brief announcement is made to inform the congregation, stating: “[Name of person] is no
longer one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Such a person is treated in the same way as a disfellowshipped person. The
142

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

coordinator of the body of elders should approve this announcement.
REINSTATEMENT
34 A disfellowshipped person or one who has disassociated himself from the congregation may be reinstated when
he gives clear evidence of repentance and over a reasonable period of time demonstrates that he has abandoned
his sinful course. He shows that he is desirous of having
a good relationship with Jehovah. The elders are careful to
allow su?cient time—many months, a year, or even longer,
depending on the circumstances—for the disfellowshipped
person to prove that his repentance is genuine. When the
body of elders receives a written plea for reinstatement,
the original judicial committee, if practical, should speak
with the individual. The committee will evaluate the evidence of “works that be?t repentance” on his part and decide whether to reinstate him at that time or not.—Acts
26:20.
35 If the person requesting reinstatement was disfellowshipped from another congregation, a local judicial committee should meet with the person and consider the plea.
Thereafter, the local judicial committee will communicate
with the body of elders of the congregation that disfellowshipped the individual, giving them their recommendation.
The involved committees will work together to make sure
that all the facts are gathered to arrive at a just decision.
However, the decision to reinstate is made by the original
judicial committee. If some members of the original committee are no longer in the congregation or are not quali?ed to serve, other elders from the original congregation
may be chosen to replace them.

MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

143

ANNOUNCEMENT OF REINSTATEMENT
36

When the judicial committee is convinced that the disfellowshipped person is genuinely repentant and should be
reinstated, an announcement of the reinstatement is made
in the congregation where the individual was disfellowshipped. If the person is now in another congregation, the
announcement will be made there as well. It should simply state: “[Name of person] is reinstated as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” The coordinator of the body of elders
should approve this announcement.
CASES INVOLVING MINOR BAPTIZED CHILDREN
37 Serious wrongdoing on the part of minor children who
are baptized should be reported to the elders. When the
elders handle cases of serious sins involving a minor, it
is preferable that the baptized parents of the young person be present. They will want to cooperate with the judicial committee, not attempting to shield the erring child
from necessary disciplinary action. Just as when dealing
with adult o?enders, the judicial committee endeavors to
reprove and restore the wrongdoer. However, if the young
person is unrepentant, disfellowshipping action is taken.

WHEN UNBAPTIZED PUBLISHERS
ARE WRONGDOERS
38 What should be done when unbaptized publishers become involved in serious wrongdoing? Since they are not
baptized members of the congregation, they cannot be formally disfellowshipped. However, they may not fully understand the Bible’s standards, and kind counsel may help
them to make “straight paths” for their feet.—Heb. 12:13.
39 If an unbaptized wrongdoer is unrepentant after two
elders have met with him and have tried to help him, then

144

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

it is necessary to inform the congregation. A brief announcement is made, stating: “[Name of person] is no longer recognized as an unbaptized publisher.” The congregation will then view the wrongdoer as a person of the world.
Although the o?ender is not disfellowshipped, Christians
exercise caution with regard to any association with him.
(1 Cor. 15:33) No ?eld service reports would be accepted
from him.
40 In time, an unbaptized person (adult or minor) who
was removed as a publisher may wish to become a publisher again. In that situation, two elders would meet with
him and ascertain his spiritual progress. If he quali?es, a
brief announcement is made, stating: “[Name of person] is
again recognized as an unbaptized publisher.”
JEHOVAH BLESSES PEACEFUL AND CLEAN WORSHIP
41

All who are associated with the congregation of God
today can rejoice in the rich spiritual estate that Jehovah
has given to his people. Our spiritual pastures are indeed
lush, and we have an abundance of refreshing waters of
truth. We also have Jehovah’s protective care through his
theocratic arrangement under the headship of Christ. (Ps.
23; Isa. 32:1, 2) Being in the spiritual paradise in these
troublesome last days has given us a feeling of security.
42 By maintaining the peace and cleanness of the congregation, we continue to let our light of Kingdom truth
shine. (Matt. 5:16; Jas. 3:18) With God’s blessing, we will
have the joy of seeing many more people come to know
Jehovah and serve with us in doing his will.

MAINTAINING THE PEACE AND CLEANNESS OF THE CONGREGATION

145

CHAPTER 15

Benefiting
From Theocratic Subjection
BEING in subjection to God, the Universal Sovereign, is
essential if we are to be organized to do Jehovah’s will.
We recognize his Son’s headship over the Christian congregation and also observe the headship principle in
other areas of life. Such theocratic subjection bene?ts
everyone concerned.
2 The idea of subjection to constituted authority was introduced to mankind in the garden of Eden. It is embodied in God’s commands found at Genesis 1:28 and 2:16,
17. Lower creatures were to be in subjection to humans,
and Adam and Eve were to submit to God’s will and authority. Obedience to this divine authority would result
in peace and good order. The headship principle is later
highlighted at 1 Corinthians 11:3. The apostle Paul wrote:
“I want you to know that the head of every man is the
Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn,
the head of the Christ is God.” This indicates that in this
overall arrangement, everyone except Jehovah is subject
to headship.
3 Most people today do not recognize or observe the
headship principle. Why? The trouble started in Eden
when mankind’s parents deliberately chose to take themselves out from under God’s sovereign headship. (Gen.
3:4, 5) However, they did not obtain greater freedom. Instead, they became subject to a wicked spirit creature,
Satan the Devil. The ?rst rebellion alienated mankind
146

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

from God. (Col. 1:21) As a result, the majority of mankind
today remain in the power of the wicked one.—1 John
5:19.
4 By learning the truth of God’s Word and acting on it,
we have come out from under Satan’s in?uence. As dedicated, baptized Witnesses, we accept Jehovah as the
Sovereign of our life. We agree with King David, who acknowledged Jehovah as “head over all.” (1 Chron. 29:11)
Yes, we humbly confess: “Know that Jehovah is God. He
is the one who made us, and we belong to him. We are
his people and the sheep of his pasture.” (Ps. 100:3) We
recognize that Jehovah is great and is worthy of our total submission, since he created all things. (Rev. 4:11) As
ministers of the true God, we follow Jesus Christ, who set
the perfect example of subjection to God.
5 What did Jesus learn from the things he su?ered while
on earth? Hebrews 5:8 answers: “Although he was a son,
he learned obedience from the things he su?ered.” Yes,
Jesus remained in loyal subjection to his heavenly Father, even when facing adversity. Furthermore, Jesus did
not do a single thing of his own initiative. He did not
speak of his own originality; nor did he seek his own glory. (John 5:19, 30; 6:38; 7:16-18) During his ministry, he
found delight in doing his Father’s will, even though this
course brought him opposition and persecution. (John
15:20) Nonetheless, Jesus showed subjection to God. Jesus “humbled himself” even to the point of “death on
a torture stake.” The outcome of his complete subjection to Jehovah was rewarding in many ways, resulting in
everlasting salvation for mankind, exaltation for himself,
and glory to his Father.—Phil. 2:5-11; Heb. 5:9.
BENEFITING FROM THEOCRATIC SUBJECTION

147

AREAS OF THEOCRATIC
SUBJECTION
6

Theocratic
subjection a?ects
all aspects of life

When we subject ourselves
to God by doing his will, we escape many of the anxieties
and frustrations that overtake
those who refuse to submit to Jehovah’s sovereignty. Our
adversary, the Devil, constantly seeks to devour us. We will
experience deliverance from that wicked one if we take a
stand against him and humble ourselves before Jehovah
in willing subjection.—Matt. 6:10, 13; 1 Pet. 5:6-9.
7 Within the Christian congregation, we recognize Christ’s
headship and the authority he has given to “the faithful and discreet slave.” This a?ects our attitude and conduct toward one another. Godly subjection in the congregation will move us to be obedient to God’s Word in all
aspects of our worship. This obedience involves our ministry, our meeting attendance and participation, our relationship with the elders, and our cooperation with organizational arrangements.—Matt. 24:45-47; 28:19, 20; Heb.
10:24, 25; 13:7, 17.
8 Our subjection to God contributes to the peace, security, and good order of the Christian congregation. Jehovah’s qualities are re?ected in his godly subjects. (1 Cor.
14:33, 40) Our own experiences with Jehovah’s organization have led us to express sentiments similar to those of
King David. After noting the contrast between Jehovah’s
servants and the wicked, David joyfully exclaimed: “Happy
is the people whose God is Jehovah!”—Ps. 144:15.
9 Within the marriage arrangement and the family structure, “the head of a woman is the man.” At the same time,
148

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

men are to be in subjection to Christ, while the head of
Christ is God. (1 Cor. 11:3) Wives are to be in subjection
to their husbands, and children to their parents. (Eph. 5:
22-24; 6:1) Peace results when each family member follows the headship principle.
10 A husband is to exercise headship in a loving way, imitating Christ. (Eph. 5:25-29) When he does not abuse or
abdicate his headship, his wife and children are delighted to be in subjection to him. The wife’s role is that of a
helper, or complement. (Gen. 2:18) By patiently supporting
and respecting her husband, she gains his favor and brings
praise to God. (1 Pet. 3:1-4) When husbands and wives follow the Bible’s counsel on headship, they set an example
for their children in showing subjection to God.
11 Our being in subjection to God also a?ects how we
view “the superior authorities,” which “stand placed in their
relative positions by God.” (Rom. 13:1-7) As law-abiding
citizens, Christians pay taxes, paying back “Caesar’s things
to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” (Matt. 22:21) Being
submissive and obedient to the duly constituted authorities in everything that is not in con?ict with Jehovah’s righteous law, we are able to direct our e?orts and energies
to the preaching work.—Mark 13:10; Acts 5:29.
12 Theocratic subjection a?ects all aspects of life. With
eyes of faith, we see the day when all mankind will be subject to Jehovah God. (1 Cor. 15:27, 28) How blessed and
favored will be those who joyfully acknowledge Jehovah’s
sovereignty and remain in subjection to him for all eternity!

BENEFITING FROM THEOCRATIC SUBJECTION

149

CHAPTER 16

A United Brotherhood
FOR some 1,500 years, Jehovah God dealt with the nation
of Israel as his name people. Then Jehovah “turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his
name.” (Acts 15:14) People for Jehovah’s name would be
his witnesses, united in thought and action regardless of
where they lived on earth. Uniting a people for God’s name
would be the result of the commission that Jesus gave to
his followers: “Go, therefore, and make disciples of people
of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them
to observe all the things I have commanded you.”—Matt.
28:19, 20.
2 By dedicating yourself to Jehovah and getting baptized,
you have become a disciple of Jesus Christ. You are part
of a united, worldwide brotherhood of Christians, who do
not allow national, tribal, or economic di?erences to divide them. (Ps. 133:1) As a result, you love and respect
your Christian companions in the congregation. Some of
them may be of a di?erent race or nationality or educational background and may formerly have been socially unacceptable to you because of these di?erences. You share
a bond of brotherly love that is far stronger than any other relationship, be it social, religious, or family.—Mark 10:
29, 30; Col. 3:14; 1 Pet. 1:22.
ADJUSTMENTS IN THINKING
3

If some have di?culty overcoming racial, political, social, or other ingrained prejudices, they might think of the
150

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

early Jewish Christians, who had to break free from Jewish religious prejudices against people of all other nations.
When Peter was instructed to go to the home of the Roman centurion Cornelius, Jehovah kindly prepared Peter
for the assignment.—Acts, chap. 10.
4 In a vision, Peter was told to kill and eat certain animals that were ceremonially unclean for Jews. When Peter
objected, a voice from heaven told him: “Stop calling de?led the things God has cleansed.” (Acts 10:15) It took this
divine intervention for Peter to condition his mind for the
assignment he was about to receive, namely, to visit a man
of the nations. When obeying Jehovah’s direction, Peter declared to those gathered: “You well know how unlawful it
is for a Jew to associate with or approach a man of another race, and yet God has shown me that I should call
no man de?led or unclean. So I came, really without objection, when I was sent for.” (Acts 10:28, 29) Thereafter,
Peter witnessed the evidence of Jehovah’s approval of Cornelius and his household.
5 Saul of Tarsus, a highly educated Pharisee, had to humble himself and associate with those who had formerly
been socially unacceptable to him. He even had to take direction from them. (Acts 4:13; Gal. 1:13-20; Phil. 3:4-11)
We can only imagine the adjustments that must have taken place in the thinking of such people as Sergius Paulus, Dionysius, Damaris, Philemon, Onesimus, and others
as they accepted the good news and became disciples of
Jesus Christ.—Acts 13:6-12; 17:22, 33, 34; Philem. 8-20.
MAINTAINING OUR INTERNATIONAL UNITY
6

No doubt the love of the brothers and sisters in the congregation helped draw you to Jehovah and his organization.
A UNITED BROTHERHOOD

151

You observed the unmistak- You are part of
able mark of love that char- a united, worldwide
acterizes true disciples of Je- brotherhood of
sus Christ, as he expressed it:
Christians, who do
“I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one not allow national,
another; just as I have loved tribal, or economic
you, you also love one anoth- di?erences to
er. By this all will know that you divide them
are my disciples—if you have
love among yourselves.” (John
13:34, 35) And you came to appreciate Jehovah and his organization even more when you realized that the love in the
congregation is only a re?ection of the love that exists in
the worldwide brotherhood. You are experiencing the ful?llment of Bible prophecy about the gathering of people in
the last days to worship Jehovah in peace and unity.—Mic.
4:1-5.
7 In view of the many divisive factors that exist today,
who would ever have thought it possible to unite people
“out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues”?
(Rev. 7:9) Consider the di?erences between the people of
a high-tech society and those who hold to ancient tribal
customs. Look at the religious rivalries between people of
the same race and nationality. With nationalism coming to
the fore, people have become more divided politically than
ever. And if you consider economic di?erences as well as
countless other divisive factors, the uniting of people out
of all nations, languages, groups, and classes in an unbreakable bond of love and peace is a miracle that only Almighty God can bring about.—Zech. 4:6.
152

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

8

But such unity is a reality, and when you became a dedicated, baptized Witness of Jehovah, you became part of
it. Bene?ting from that unity, you have the responsibility to
help maintain it. This is done by heeding the apostle Paul’s
words found at Galatians 6:10: “As long as we have the
opportunity, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” We also
follow this counsel: “Do nothing out of contentiousness or
out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior
to you, as you look out not only for your own interests,
but also for the interests of others.” (Phil. 2:3, 4) As long
as we train ourselves to see our brothers and sisters as
Jehovah sees them and not according to what they are in
the ?esh, we will continue to enjoy peaceful and happy relationships with them.—Eph. 4:23, 24.
CONCERN FOR ONE ANOTHER
9 As the apostle Paul illustrated for us, the congregation
is not divided but its members have mutual concern for
one another. (1 Cor. 12:14-26) What a?ects some members of the organization a?ects all of God’s people. We
may be separated by great distances from some of those
in our worldwide brotherhood, but we are not less concerned about their welfare. If some of our brothers are
being persecuted, the rest of us are greatly distressed. If
some are in need or have become victims of disaster or
war or civil strife, the rest are eager to ?nd ways to render spiritual as well as material assistance.—2 Cor. 1:8-11.
10 All of us should pray for our brothers every day. Some
are facing temptation to do what is bad. Others experience su?ering that may be publicly known. Still others
face opposition from workmates and from within divided

A UNITED BROTHERHOOD

153

households that is relatively unknown. (Matt. 10:35, 36;
1 Thess. 2:14) This is of concern to us because we are a
worldwide brotherhood. (1 Pet. 5:9) Among us are those
who are working hard in Jehovah’s service, taking the lead
in the preaching work and in the congregations. Also, there
are those who are charged with the oversight of the worldwide work. All need our prayers, by which we demonstrate
our love and genuine interest, even when there may not
be anything else that we can personally do to be of assistance.—Eph. 1:16; 1 Thess. 1:2, 3; 5:25.
11 With all the turmoil on earth during these last days,
Jehovah’s people must be prepared to come to the aid
of one another. At times disasters, such as earthquakes
and ?oods, call for conducting extensive relief e?orts and
arranging for large amounts of material assistance. Firstcentury Christians set a ?ne example in this regard. Remembering Jesus’ counsel, the disciples in other lands
gladly sent material gifts to the brothers in Judea during a
time of famine. (Acts 11:27-30; 20:35) The apostle Paul organized the relief so that everything was carried out in an
orderly manner. (2 Cor. 9:1-15) In modern times, when our
brothers become victims of circumstances and need material relief, the organization and individual Christians are
quick to respond and supply what is needed.
SET APART TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL
12

Our united, worldwide brotherhood is organized to do
Jehovah’s will. At this time, his will is that the good news of
the Kingdom be preached in all the earth for a witness to
all the nations. (Matt. 24:14) While we are doing this work,
it is Jehovah’s will that we conduct ourselves in accord with
his high moral standards. (1 Pet. 1:14-16) We should be
154

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

willing to subject ourselves to one another and to work for
the advancement of the good news. (Eph. 5:21) As never
before, this is a time, not to seek our own personal interests, but to put God’s Kingdom ?rst in our life. (Matt. 6:33)
Keeping this in mind as we work together for the sake of
the good news brings joyful satisfaction now and will lead
to everlasting blessings.
13 As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we are unique, set apart from
the rest of mankind as a clean people, zealous in service
to our God. (Titus 2:14) Our worship of Jehovah makes
us di?erent. Not only do we work shoulder to shoulder
with our brothers around the earth but we speak the one
language of truth and act in harmony with the truth we
speak. This was foretold when Jehovah declared through
his prophet Zephaniah: “I will change the language of the
peoples to a pure language, so that all of them may call
on the name of Jehovah, to serve him shoulder to shoulder.”—Zeph. 3:9.
14 Then Jehovah inspired Zephaniah to describe the
worldwide brotherhood that has become a reality today:
“Those remaining of Israel will practice no unrighteousness; they will not speak a lie, nor will a deceitful tongue be
found in their mouths; they will feed and lie down, and no
one will make them afraid.” (Zeph. 3:13) Having gained an
understanding of Jehovah’s Word of truth and made over
our mind and conformed our way of life to Jehovah’s standards, we are able to work in unity. We accomplish what
appears to be impossible in the eyes of those who view
matters from a human standpoint. Yes, we are indeed a
distinct people, God’s people, bringing honor to him in all
the earth.—Mic. 2:12.
A UNITED BROTHERHOOD

155

CHAPTER 17

Stay Close to Jehovah’s
Organization
THE disciple James wrote: “Draw close to God, and he will
draw close to you.” (Jas. 4:8) Yes, Jehovah is not too lofty
nor too far removed to hear our expressions to him, despite our imperfections. (Acts 17:27) How can we draw
close to God? We can do this by building a close personal
relationship with Jehovah that includes earnest prayer. (Ps.
39:12) We can also cultivate intimacy with God by regularly studying his Word, the Bible. In this way, we get to know
Jehovah God, his purposes, and his will for us. (2 Tim. 3:
16, 17) Thus, we learn to love him and develop a wholesome fear of displeasing him.—Ps. 25:14.
2 Closeness with Jehovah, however, is possible only
through his Son, Jesus. (John 17:3; Rom. 5:10) No human
could ever give us better insight into the mind of Jehovah
than Jesus did. He was so intimately acquainted with his
Father that he could say: “No one knows who the Son is
except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.” (Luke 10:22) So when we study the Gospels to
learn about the way Jesus thought and felt, we are, in effect, learning how Jehovah thinks and feels. Such knowledge enables us to draw closer to our God.
3 Under the headship of God’s Son, we cultivate intimacy with Jehovah by staying close to the visible channel that
helps us learn how to do God’s will. As foretold at Matthew 24:45-47, the Master, Jesus Christ, has appointed
156

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“the faithful and discreet slave” to provide “food at the
proper time” for the household of faith. Today, the faithful
slave supplies us with an abundance of spiritual food in
the form of Bible-based publications as well as assembly
and convention programs. Through this channel, Jehovah
counsels us to read his Word daily, to attend our Christian meetings regularly, and to have a meaningful share in
preaching the “good news of the Kingdom.” (Matt. 24:14;
28:19, 20; Josh. 1:8; Ps. 1:1-3) Never would we want to
have a ?eshly viewpoint of the faithful slave. We should endeavor to stay close to the visible part of Jehovah’s organization and respond to its direction. This will draw us closer to our God, Jehovah, and will serve to strengthen and
protect us despite trials.
WHY TRIALS ARE INCREASING
4 Perhaps you have been in the truth for many years. If
so, you certainly know what it means to endure tests of
integrity. But even if you have only recently come to know
Jehovah and associate with his people, you are aware that
Satan the Devil opposes anyone who submits to Jehovah’s
sovereignty. (2 Tim. 3:12) So whether you have endured
little or much, there is no reason for you to become fearful or discouraged. Jehovah promises that he will sustain
you and reward you with deliverance and future life.—Heb.
13:5, 6; Rev. 2:10.
5 All of us may yet be subjected to trials during these
remaining days of Satan’s system. Ever since God’s Kingdom was established in 1914, Satan has not been permitted access to Jehovah’s heavens. He was hurled down to
the earth, where he and his wicked angels are con?ned.
The increased woe on the earth, including the intensi?ed

STAY CLOSE TO JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION

157

persecution of Jehovah’s dedicated servants, is a result of
Satan’s anger and is proof that we are living in the last
days of his wicked rule over mankind.—Rev. 12:1-12.
6 Infuriated by his debased condition, Satan knows that
his time is short. With his demons, he makes every e?ort
to interfere with the Kingdom-preaching work and to destroy the unity of Jehovah’s servants. This puts us at the
battle lines of the spiritual warfare described as “a struggle, not against blood and ?esh, but against the governments, against the authorities, against the world rulers of
this darkness, against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.” If we are to come o? victorious on Jehovah’s
side, we must not let up in the ?ght but keep our spiritual
armor intact. We must “stand ?rm against the crafty acts”
of the Devil. (Eph. 6:10-17) This calls for endurance on our
part.
CULTIVATING ENDURANCE
7

Endurance means “the ability to withstand hardship or
adversity.” In a spiritual sense, endurance refers to a quality of ?rmness in doing what is right in the face of hardship,
opposition, persecution, or any other factor designed to
turn us away from our course of integrity to God. Christian
endurance must be cultivated. This takes time. Our ability to endure increases as we make spiritual progress. By
enduring minor tests of our faith that come at the beginning of our Christian course, we become stronger, able to
endure more di?cult trials that are sure to come. (Luke
16:10) We cannot a?ord to wait until major trials come
along before making it our determination to stand ?rm
in the faith. Our ?rm decision must be made before the
test comes. Pointing out that endurance is to be cultivated
158

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

along with other godly qualities, the apostle Peter wrote:
“Put forth all earnest e?ort to supply to your faith virtue, to
your virtue knowledge, to your knowledge self-control, to
your self-control endurance, to your endurance godly devotion, to your godly devotion brotherly a?ection, to your
brotherly a?ection love.”—2 Pet. 1:5-7; 1 Tim. 6:11.
8 The importance of cultivating endurance is called to
our attention by James in his letter: “Consider it all joy,
my brothers, when you meet with various trials, knowing
as you do that this tested quality of your faith produces
endurance. But let endurance complete its work, so that
you may be complete and sound in all respects, not lacking in anything.” (Jas. 1:2-4) James says that Christians
should welcome trials and be joyful about them because
they help us to produce endurance. Have you looked at
matters that way? Then James shows that endurance itself has a work to perform in perfecting our Christian personality and making us fully acceptable to God. Yes, our
endurance is built up day by day as we face and overcome
trials. Endurance, in turn, produces other desirable qualities that we need.
9 Our endurance is pleasing to Jehovah; it will move him
to grant us the reward of everlasting life. James further
stated: “Happy is the man who keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of
life, which Jehovah promised to those who continue loving
Him.” (Jas. 1:12) Yes, it is with life in view that we endure.
Without endurance, we cannot stay in the truth. If we succumb to worldly pressures, we will be forced back into the
world. Without endurance, we will not continue to have Jehovah’s spirit and therefore we will not produce its fruitage in our life.
STAY CLOSE TO JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION

159

10 If we are to keep on enOur endurance is
during in these di?cult times, built up day by day
we need to cultivate the prop- as we face and
er attitude toward su?ering as
overcome trials
Christians. Recall that James
wrote: “Consider it all joy.”
That may not be easy to do,
inasmuch as physical su?ering or mental anguish may be
involved. But remember that future life is at stake. An experience of the apostles helps us to see how we can rejoice
during su?erings. The account is found in the book of Acts,
and it reads: “They summoned the apostles, ?ogged them,
and ordered them to stop speaking on the basis of Jesus’
name, and let them go. So they went out from before the
Sanhedrin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of his name.” (Acts 5:40, 41)
The apostles understood that their su?ering was proof that
they had been obedient to Jesus’ command and that they
had received Jehovah’s approval. Years later, when writing
his ?rst inspired letter, Peter commented on the value of
such su?ering for righteousness’ sake.—1 Pet. 4:12-16.
11 Another experience involves Paul and Silas. When carrying on their missionary work in Philippi, they were arrested and charged with disturbing the city and proclaiming
unlawful customs. As a result, they were severely beaten and thrown into prison. The Bible account tells us that
while they were yet in prison with their wounds unattended,
“about the middle of the night, Paul and Silas were praying and praising God with song, and the prisoners were listening to them.” (Acts 16:16-25) Paul and his companion
rightly viewed their su?erings for Christ not only as evidence of their own integrity before God and men but also

160

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

as a means of giving a further witness to those who might
be inclined to listen to the good news. The life of others
was involved. That very night, the jailer and his household
listened and became disciples. (Acts 16:26-34) Paul and
Silas trusted in Jehovah, in his power, and in his willingness to sustain them in their su?erings. They were not disappointed.
12 Today, too, Jehovah has provided all that we need to
sustain us during times of trial. He wants us to endure. He
has given us his inspired Word to equip us with accurate
knowledge concerning his purpose. This builds up our faith.
We have the opportunity to associate with fellow believers and to render sacred service. We also have the privilege of maintaining close association with Jehovah himself through prayer. He listens to our expressions of praise
and our earnest requests for help to keep a clean standing before him. (Phil. 4:13) And not to be overlooked is the
strength derived from contemplating the hope set before
us.—Matt. 24:13; Heb. 6:18; Rev. 21:1-4.
ENDURING VARIOUS TRIALS
13 The trials we face today are much like those faced by
the early disciples of Jesus Christ. In modern times, Jehovah’s Witnesses have su?ered verbal and physical abuse
at the hands of misinformed opposers. Just as in the days
of the apostles, much of the opposition is instigated by
religious fanatics whose false teachings and practices are
exposed in God’s Word. (Acts 17:5-9, 13) At times, Jehovah’s people have found relief by claiming legal rights that
are guaranteed by political governments. (Acts 22:25; 25:
11) However, rulers have also imposed o?cial bans on our
work, endeavoring to put an end to our Christian ministry.

STAY CLOSE TO JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION

161

(Ps. 2:1-3) Under such circumstances, we boldly follow the
example of the faithful apostles, who said: “We must obey
God as ruler rather than men.”—Acts 5:29.
14 As the spirit of nationalism intensi?es throughout the
earth, greater pressures are put on preachers of the good
news to abandon their God-given ministry. All of God’s servants appreciate more fully the warning found at Revelation 14:9-12 concerning the worship of “the wild beast
and its image.” We realize the signi?cance of John’s words:
“Here is where it calls for endurance on the part of the holy
ones, those who keep the commandments of God and hold
fast to the faith of Jesus.”
15 Tests that come because of wars, revolutions, or outright persecution and o?cial bans may make it impossible for you to carry on Christian worship openly. You may
not be able to meet as a congregation. Contact with the
branch o?ce may be cut o?. Visits by circuit overseers
may be interrupted. Publications may not arrive. If any of
these things happen, what should you do?
16 The answer is, do whatever you can and as much as
you can under the circumstances. Personal study should
be possible. Small groups can usually meet for study in private homes. Publications studied in the past and the Bible
itself can be used as a basis for meetings. Do not worry
or get excited. The Governing Body will generally be able
to establish some form of communication with responsible
brothers in a short time.
17 Even if you do ?nd yourself isolated from all your Christian brothers, keep in mind that you are not isolated from
Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ. Your hope can remain ?rm. Jehovah can still hear your prayers, and he can
162

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

strengthen you with his spirit. Look to him for guidance.
Remember that you are a servant of Jehovah and a disciple of Jesus Christ. Therefore, make good use of opportunities to witness. Jehovah will bless your e?orts, and others may soon join you in true worship.—Acts 4:13-31; 5:2742; Phil. 1:27-30; 4:6, 7; 2 Tim. 4:16-18.
18 If, however, like the apostles and others, you are faced
with the very threat of death, put your trust in “the God
who raises up the dead.” (2 Cor. 1:8-10) Your faith in his
provision of the resurrection can help you to endure even
the most severe opposition. (Luke 21:19) Christ Jesus
set the example; he knew that his faithfulness under test
would strengthen others to endure. You can be a source
of strength to your brothers in a similar way.—John 16:33;
Heb. 12:2, 3; 1 Pet. 2:21.
19 Besides persecution and opposition, you may have to
endure other di?cult situations. For example, some have
become discouraged because of the apathy of people in
their territory. Others have had to cope with their own
physical or emotional illnesses or have had to endure limitations imposed by human frailty. The apostle Paul likewise had to endure a trial of some sort that interfered with
his service or made it di?cult at times. (2 Cor. 12:7) Also,
Epaphroditus, a ?rst-century Christian from Philippi, became “depressed because [his friends] heard he had fallen
sick.” (Phil. 2:25-27) Our human imperfections and those
of others may pose problems particularly di?cult to endure. There may be personality con?icts with fellow Christians or even within one’s family. But such obstacles can
be endured successfully and can be overcome by those
who adhere to the counsel of Jehovah’s Word.—Ezek. 2:
3-5; 1 Cor. 9:27; 13:8; Col. 3:12-14; 1 Pet. 4:8.
STAY CLOSE TO JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION

163

DETERMINED TO REMAIN FAITHFUL
20

We must hold fast to the one whom Jehovah has appointed as Head of the congregation, Jesus Christ. (Col. 2:
18, 19) We need to work closely with “the faithful and discreet slave” and those appointed as overseers. (Heb. 13:7,
17) By adhering closely to theocratic arrangements and cooperating with those taking the lead, we will be organized
to do Jehovah’s will. We need to make full use of the privilege of prayer. Remember, not even prison walls or solitary con?nement can cut o? our communication with our
loving heavenly Father or disrupt the unity we have with
fellow worshippers.
21 With determination and endurance, let us do all we can
to carry out our commission to preach, persevering in the
work the resurrected Jesus Christ set out for his followers to do: “Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of
all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to
observe all the things I have commanded you.” (Matt. 28:
19, 20) Like Jesus, let us endure. May we keep the Kingdom hope and the prospect of everlasting life clearly before us. (Heb. 12:2) As baptized disciples of Christ, we have
the privilege of sharing in the ful?llment of Jesus’ prophecy regarding “the conclusion of the system of things.” He
said: “This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in
all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and
then the end will come.” (Matt. 24:3, 14) If we apply ourselves wholeheartedly to that work during this time, we will
have the joy of entering into an eternity of life in Jehovah’s
righteous new world!

164

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

APPENDIX

A Message
to Christian Parents:
As a parent, you desire to help your precious children
come to love Jehovah and dedicate their life to him. What
can you do to help prepare them for baptism? At what
point will they be ready for this important step? Jesus
instructed his followers: “Make disciples of people of all
the nations, baptizing them.” (Matt. 28:19) According to
this, the primary requirement for baptism is to be a disciple—one who not only understands and believes Christ’s
teachings but follows them closely. This is something that
even the relatively young can do.
Set a good example for your children, and inculcate Jehovah’s teachings in them. (Deut. 6:6-9) This includes using the information in the books What Does the Bible Really Teach? and “Keep Yourselves in God’s Love” to teach
them basic Bible truths and prepare them to reason on Bible principles. Help your children to be able to explain their
beliefs in their own words. (1 Pet. 3:15) The knowledge and
encouragement they receive from you and from personal study, congregation meetings, and good associates will
help them progress to baptism and beyond. Keep spiritual goals before them.
Proverbs 20:11 says: “Even a child is known by his actions, whether his behavior is pure and right.” What are
some actions that would indicate that a child, either a boy
or a girl, has become a disciple of Jesus Christ and is ready
to get baptized?
APPENDIX

165

A child who is progressing toward baptism should obey
his godly parents. (Col. 3:20) Regarding Jesus when he
was 12 years old, the Bible says: “He continued subject to
[his parents].” (Luke 2:51) Of course, you cannot expect
your child to be perfect. But one who desires to get baptized will strive to follow Jesus’ example and be known for
his subjection to his parents.
He will also demonstrate an interest in learning Bible
truths. (Luke 2:46) Does your child want to attend meetings and participate? (Ps. 122:1) Does he have an appetite
for regular Bible reading and personal study?—Matt. 4:4.
A child progressing toward baptism endeavors to put
Kingdom interests ?rst. (Matt. 6:33) He is mindful of his responsibility as an unbaptized publisher and demonstrates
initiative to go in the ?eld service and talk at the doors.
He shares in various aspects of the ministry and is not
ashamed to let his teachers and schoolmates know that he
is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He takes his assignments
for the Life and Ministry Meeting seriously.
He will also strive to remain morally clean by avoiding
bad associations. (Prov. 13:20; 1 Cor. 15:33) This will be
re?ected in his preferences regarding music, movies, television programs, video games, and the use of the Internet.
Many have responded to the diligent e?orts of their parents, made the truth their own, and quali?ed for baptism
in their youth. May Jehovah bless you as you help your
children reach this important milestone in their relationship
with Jehovah.

166

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

A Message
to the Unbaptized Publisher:
It is a privilege to serve with the congregation as an unbaptized publisher. You are to be commended for the spiritual progress you have made. You have come to know God
through a study of his Word and have exercised faith in
his promises.—John 17:3; Heb. 11:6.
Before you started to study with Jehovah’s Witnesses,
you may have associated in some way with a di?erent religious organization or you may have had no religious af?liation at all. Perhaps you engaged in another activity out
of harmony with Bible principles. But now you have manifested your faith by repentance, which means deep regret
over past wrongdoing, and by conversion, which means rejecting a wrong course and determining to do what is right
in God’s sight.—Acts 3:19.
On the other hand, perhaps like Timothy, “from infancy
you have known the holy writings,” and you have thereby
been safeguarded from involvement in unchristian conduct
and serious wrongdoing. (2 Tim. 3:15) You have learned to
resist peer pressure and other inducements to do what is
bad in Jehovah’s eyes. You have demonstrated faith by upholding true worship and sharing your beliefs with others.
You have been trained in the Christian ministry. Now you
have made a personal decision to serve Jehovah as an unbaptized publisher.
In either case, whether you learned Jehovah’s ways from
infancy or came to know Jehovah later in life, you may
now be contemplating two further steps in your spiritual
APPENDIX

167

progress—dedication and baptism. You make a dedication
to Jehovah by approaching him in prayer and expressing
your personal decision to give him exclusive devotion forever. (Matt. 16:24) In symbol of that dedication, you then
undergo water baptism. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Through dedication and baptism, you become an ordained minister of Jehovah God. What a wonderful privilege!
As your study of the Bible has indicated, though, you
may encounter various challenges. Remember that shortly after baptism, “Jesus was led by the spirit up into the
wilderness to be tempted by the Devil.” (Matt. 4:1) Following your baptism as a disciple of Christ, you can expect
further tests. (John 15:20) They will come in various forms.
You may face opposition from family. (Matt. 10:36) You
may be ridiculed by schoolmates, workmates, and former
associates. Always remember Jesus’ words found at Mark
10:29, 30: “Truly I say to you, no one has left house or
brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or ?elds
for my sake and for the sake of the good news who will
not get 100 times more now in this period of time—houses,
brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and ?elds, with persecutions—and in the coming system of things, everlasting
life.” So continue working hard to stay close to Jehovah
and to live up to his righteous standards.
When you desire to get baptized, make this known to the
congregation elders. The questions that follow this message provide the basis for discussions that the elders will
have with you in order to determine whether you qualify
for baptism. You may begin reviewing these questions privately as a part of your regular personal study program.
168

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

In preparation for these discussions, take time to read
and re?ect on the quoted and cited Scripture references.
In many cases, they may not provide the complete answer
to the question posed, but they will help you to see the
Scriptural basis for an answer. If you are not sure of the
answer to a question, you may ?nd it helpful to do some
additional research using the Bible and the publications
provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45)
You may wish to make personal notes in this book or elsewhere. You may use those notes and have this book open
during your discussions with the elders. If you have dif?culty understanding any of the questions, feel free to ask
for assistance from the one who is studying the Bible with
you or from the elders.
In your discussions with the elders, do not feel that you
have to give lengthy or complicated answers to the questions. A simple, direct answer in your own words will usually su?ce. For many of the questions, it is also bene?cial
to refer to one or two Bible texts that show the Scriptural basis for your answer.
If you have not yet gained su?cient knowledge of basic
Bible teachings, the elders will arrange for you to receive
assistance so that you will be able to express in your own
words a proper understanding of the Scriptures and qualify for baptism at a later time.
[Note to congregation elders: Instructions for handling
discussions with baptism candidates appear on pages 211214.]

APPENDIX

169

Questions for Those
Desiring to Get Baptized
PART 1

ELEMENTARY BIBLE TEACHINGS

Your study of the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses has acquainted you with the truth. What you have learned has
no doubt brought you great spiritual refreshment and
has given you the hope of future life and blessings on a
paradise earth under God’s Kingdom. Your faith in God’s
Word has been strengthened, and through association with
the Christian congregation, you have already experienced
many blessings. You have come to appreciate how Jehovah is dealing with his people today.—Zech. 8:23.
As you now prepare for baptism, you will bene?t from
a review of elementary Bible teachings, conducted by the
congregation elders. (Heb. 6:1-3) May Jehovah continue to
bless all your endeavors to come to know him, and may he
grant you the promised reward.—John 17:3.

170

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

1. Who is the true God?
“Know, therefore, on this day, and take it to heart that Jehovah is the true God in the heavens above and on the earth
beneath. There is no other.”—Deut. 4:39.
“Even though there are so-called gods, whether in heaven
or on earth, just as there are many ‘gods’ and many ‘lords,’
there is actually to us one God, the Father, from whom all
things are and we for him; and there is one Lord, Jesus
Christ, through whom all things are and we through him.”
—1 Cor. 8:5, 6.
Additional references: Ps. 83:18; Isa. 43:10-12.

2. What are some of Jehovah’s outstanding attributes?
“God is love.”—1 John 4:8.
“The Rock, perfect is his activity, for all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness who is never unjust; righteous
and upright is he.”—Deut. 32:4.
“O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge!
How unsearchable his judgments are and beyond tracing
out his ways are!”—Rom. 11:33.
“Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Look! You made the
heavens and the earth by your great power and by your
outstretched arm. Nothing is too wonderful for you.”—Jer.
32:17.

3. What terms does the Bible use to help us understand
some aspects of Jehovah’s authority?
“Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver, Jehovah
is our King; he is the One who will save us.”—Isa. 33:22.
“Do you not know? Have you not heard? Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, is a God for all eternity. He
never tires out or grows weary. His understanding is unsearchable.”—Isa. 40:28.

4. What does it mean to give Jehovah exclusive
devotion? Why does he alone deserve such devotion?
“You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart
and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and
with your whole strength.”—Mark 12:30.
APPENDIX

171

“Jesus said to [Satan]: ‘It is written, “It is Jehovah your
God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.”’ ”—Luke 4:8.
“You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all
things, and because of your will they came into existence
and were created.”—Rev. 4:11.
Additional references: Ex. 20:4, 5; Acts 17:28.

5. How should we view God’s personal name?
“I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your
name forever and ever. All day long I will praise you; I will
praise your name forever and ever.”—Ps. 145:1, 2.
“You must pray, then, this way: ‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sancti?ed.’ ”—Matt. 6:9.
Additional reference: Ex. 20:7.

6. Why is it important for us to use God’s personal
name in worship?
“Symeon has related thoroughly how God for the ?rst
time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them
a people for his name.”—Acts 15:14.
“Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be
saved.”—Rom. 10:13.
Additional references: Ps. 91:14; Joel 2:32.

7. How will Jehovah God sanctify his name? How can we
have a share in this?
“I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and
make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and
they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”—Ezek. 38:23.
“May they be put to shame and be terri?ed forever; may
they be disgraced and perish; may people know that you,
whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over
all the earth.”—Ps. 83:17, 18.
172

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, so that I
can make a reply to him who taunts me.”—Prov. 27:11.
Additional references: Ezek. 36:16-18; 1 Pet. 2:12.

8. Why would it be wrong for us to make an image
of God or attempt to worship him through the use of
images?
“You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form
like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth
below or in the waters under the earth. You must not bow
down to them nor be led to serve them, for I, Jehovah your
God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion.”—Deut. 5:
8, 9.
“I am Jehovah. That is my name; I give my glory to no one
else, nor my praise to graven images.”—Isa. 42:8.
“God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship
with spirit and truth.”—John 4:24.
“We are walking by faith, not by sight.”—2 Cor. 5:7.

9. What does it mean for a person to dedicate himself
to Jehovah? Have you made your personal dedication to
Jehovah in prayer?
“‘Look! I have come . . . to do your will, O God.’ . . . ‘Look!
I have come to do your will.’ ”—Heb. 10:7, 9.
“Jesus said to his disciples: ‘If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake
and keep following me.’ ”—Matt. 16:24.

10. Who is Jesus Christ?
“Simon Peter answered: ‘You are the Christ, the Son of
the living God.’ ”—Matt. 16:16.
“He is the image of the invisible God, the ?rstborn of all
creation; because by means of him all other things were
created in the heavens and on the earth, the things visible and the things invisible, whether they are thrones or
APPENDIX

173

lordships or governments or authorities. All other things
have been created through him and for him.”—Col. 1:15, 16.
Additional references: John 1:1, 2, 14; Acts 2:36.

11. What is Jesus’ position in relation to Jehovah God,
and what authority has Jehovah given him?
“I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than
I am.”—John 14:28.
“Keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ
Jesus, who, although he was existing in God’s form, gave no
consideration to a seizure, namely, that he should be equal
to God. No, but he emptied himself and took a slave’s form
and became human. More than that, when he came as a
man, he humbled himself and became obedient to the point
of death, yes, death on a torture stake. For this very reason, God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave
him the name that is above every other name, so that in the
name of Jesus every knee should bend—of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground—and
every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ
is Lord to the glory of God the Father.”—Phil. 2:5-11.
Additional references: Dan. 7:13, 14; John 14:10, 11; 1 Cor.
11:3.

12. Why did Jesus come to earth?
“The Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to
minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for
many.”—Matt. 20:28.
“God loved the world so much that he gave his onlybegotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him
might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”—John
3:16.
“He saw Jesus coming toward him, and he said: ‘See, the
Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!’ ”—John
1:29.
174

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“For this I have come into the world, that I should bear
witness to the truth.”—John 18:37.

13. Why do we need the ransom, and how does it a?ect
you personally?
“By means of him we have the release by ransom through
the blood of that one, yes, the forgiveness of our trespasses.”—Eph. 1:7.
“The love the Christ has compels us, because this is what
we have concluded, that one man died for all; so, then, all
had died. And he died for all so that those who live should
live no longer for themselves, but for him who died for them
and was raised up.”—2 Cor. 5:14, 15.
Additional references: Rom. 3:23; 1 John 4:11.

14. What is holy spirit, and what has been accomplished
by means of it?
“God’s active force was moving about over the surface of
the waters.”—Gen. 1:2.
“No prophecy of Scripture springs from any private interpretation. For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s
will, but men spoke from God as they were moved by holy
spirit.”—2 Pet. 1:20, 21.
“They all became ?lled with holy spirit and started to
speak in di?erent languages, just as the spirit enabled them
to speak.”—Acts 2:4.

15. How does holy spirit operate for our bene?t today?
“You will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon
you, and you will be witnesses of me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the most distant part of the earth.”
—Acts 1:8.
“Pay attention to yourselves and to all the ?ock, among
which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God.”—Acts 20:28.
APPENDIX

175

“It is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for
the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of
God.”—1 Cor. 2:10.
“The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control. Against
such things there is no law.”—Gal. 5:22, 23.
Additional references: Matt. 10:19, 20; John 14:26.

16. What is the Kingdom of God?
“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up
a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom
will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and
put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand
forever.”—Dan. 2:44.
“Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in
heaven, also on earth.”—Matt. 6:10.
Additional references: Isa. 9:7; John 18:36.

17. What blessings will Kingdom rule bring for the earth
and for mankind?
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death
will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain
be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Rev.
21:4.
“The nursing child will play over the lair of a cobra, and
a weaned child will put his hand over the den of a poisonous snake. They will not cause any harm or any ruin in all
my holy mountain.”—Isa. 11:8, 9.
Additional references: Isa. 26:9; 65:21, 22.

18. What does it mean to seek ?rst the Kingdom?
“Stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth . . .
Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven . . . No
one can slave for two masters . . . You cannot slave for God
and for Riches. . . . So never be anxious and say, ‘What are
we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to
176

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

wear?’ For all these are the things the nations are eagerly
pursuing.”—Matt. 6:19-32.
“The Kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure, hidden
in the ?eld, that a man found and hid; and because of his
joy, he goes and sells everything he has and buys that ?eld.
Again the Kingdom of the heavens is like a traveling merchant seeking ?ne pearls. Upon ?nding one pearl of high
value, he went away and promptly sold all the things he had
and bought it.”—Matt. 13:44-46.
Additional references: Matt. 16:24; 19:27-29.

19. How do we know that we have entered into the time
of the end and that God’s Kingdom is ruling?
“While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: ‘Tell us, when will
these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence
and of the conclusion of the system of things?’ ”—Matt. 24:3.
“Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to
deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves,
lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without
self-control, ?erce, without love of goodness, betrayers,
headstrong, pu?ed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having an appearance of godliness
but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.”
—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
Additional references: Matt. 24:4-14; Rev. 6:1-8; 12:1-12.

20. Who is Satan the Devil? Where did he and his
demons come from?
“Down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent,
the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire
inhabited earth.”—Rev. 12:9.
APPENDIX

177

“That one was a murderer when he began, and he did not
stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him. When
he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition, because he is a liar and the father of the lie.”—John
8:44.
“The angels who did not keep their original position but
forsook their own proper dwelling place, he has reserved
with eternal bonds in dense darkness for the judgment of
the great day.”—Jude 6.
Additional references: Job 1:6; 2:1.

21. In the garden of Eden, what challenge did Satan
make against Jehovah and His rulership? What false
accusation did Satan later make against faithful Job?
“The serpent . . . said to the woman: ‘Did God really say
that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?’ At this
the woman said to the serpent: ‘We may eat of the fruit of
the trees of the garden. But God has said about the fruit
of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: “You must
not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you
will die.”’ At this the serpent said to the woman: ‘You certainly will not die. For God knows that in the very day you
eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like
God, knowing good and bad.’ ”—Gen. 3:1-5.
“Satan answered Jehovah: ‘Is it for nothing that Job has
feared God? Have you not put up a protective hedge around
him and his house and everything he has? You have blessed
the work of his hands, and his livestock has spread out in
the land. But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike
everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very
face.’ ”—Job 1:9-11.
“Satan answered Jehovah: ‘Skin for skin. A man will give
everything that he has for his life. But, for a change, stretch
out your hand and strike his bone and ?esh, and he will
surely curse you to your very face.’ ”—Job 2:4, 5.
178

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

22. How can we personally show our support for
Jehovah and his rulership and prove that Satan’s
accusations against God’s servants are false?
“Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, so that I
can make a reply to him who taunts me.”—Prov. 27:11.
“It is unthinkable for me to declare you men righteous!
Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity!”—Job 27:5.
Additional references: Ps. 26:11; Jas. 4:7.

23. According to Jehovah’s judgment against Satan and
his demons, what will become of them?
“I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your o?spring and her o?spring. He will crush your
head, and you will strike him in the heel.”—Gen. 3:15.
“For his part, the God who gives peace will crush Satan
under your feet shortly. May the undeserved kindness of
our Lord Jesus be with you.”—Rom. 16:20.
“I saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of
the abyss and a great chain in his hand. He seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and
bound him for 1,000 years.”—Rev. 20:1, 2.
“The Devil who was misleading them was hurled into the
lake of ?re and sulfur, where both the wild beast and the
false prophet already were.”—Rev. 20:10.

24. What are some of the spiritistic practices that
Christians shun?
“There should not be found in you anyone who makes
his son or his daughter pass through the ?re, anyone who
employs divination, anyone practicing magic, anyone who
looks for omens, a sorcerer, anyone binding others with a
spell, anyone who consults a spirit medium or a fortuneteller, or anyone who inquires of the dead.”—Deut. 18:10, 11.
APPENDIX

179

“As for the cowards and those without faith and those
who are disgusting in their ?lth and murderers and the sexually immoral and those practicing spiritism and idolaters
and all the liars, their portion will be in the lake that burns
with ?re and sulfur. This means the second death.”—Rev.
21:8.

25. What is the human soul? Can the soul die?
“Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from
the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life,
and the man became a living person [or, “soul,” ftn.].”—Gen.
2:7.
“Look! All the souls—to me they belong. As the soul of
the father so also the soul of the son—to me they belong.
The soul who sins is the one who will die.”—Ezek. 18:4.

26. What is sin? How did we all become sinners?
“Everyone who practices sin is also practicing lawlessness, and sin is lawlessness.”—1 John 3:4.
“Through one man sin entered into the world and death
through sin, and so death spread to all men because they
had all sinned.”—Rom. 5:12.
Additional reference: Ps. 51:5.

27. What should you do if you commit a serious sin?
“Finally I confessed my sin to you; I did not cover my error. I said: ‘I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah.’ ”
—Ps. 32:5.
“Is there anyone sick among you? Let him call the elders
of the congregation to him, and let them pray over him, applying oil to him in the name of Jehovah. And the prayer
of faith will make the sick one well, and Jehovah will raise
him up. Also, if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven. Therefore, openly confess your sins to one another and
pray for one another, so that you may be healed. A righteous man’s supplication has a powerful e?ect.”—Jas. 5:
14-16.
180

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“The one covering over his transgressions will not succeed, but whoever confesses and abandons them will be
shown mercy.”—Prov. 28:13.

28. What should be our attitude toward sin?
“Do not let sin continue to rule as king in your mortal
bodies so that you should obey their desires. For sin must
not be master over you, seeing that you are not under law
but under undeserved kindness.”—Rom. 6:12, 14.

29. What is death?
“In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust
you are and to dust you will return.”—Gen. 3:19.
“The living know that they will die, but the dead know
nothing at all, nor do they have any more reward, because
all memory of them is forgotten.”—Eccl. 9:5.
Additional references: Ps. 146:4; Eccl. 3:19, 20; 9:10;
John 11:11-14.

30. Why do people die?
“Through one man sin entered into the world and death
through sin, and so death spread to all men because they
had all sinned.”—Rom. 5:12.
“The wages sin pays is death.”—Rom. 6:23.

31. What hope is there for one who dies?
“I have hope toward God, which hope these men also look
forward to, that there is going to be a resurrection of both
the righteous and the unrighteous.”—Acts 24:15.
“Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming in which
all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come
out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, and
those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.”—John 5:28, 29.
APPENDIX

181

32. How many from among mankind will be resurrected
to heaven?
“I saw, and look! the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and
with him 144,000 who have his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. And they are singing what
seems to be a new song before the throne and before the
four living creatures and the elders, and no one was able to
master that song except the 144,000, who have been bought
from the earth.”—Rev. 14:1, 3.

33. What will those who are resurrected to heaven do
there?
“You made them to be a kingdom and priests to our God,
and they are to rule as kings over the earth.”—Rev. 5:10.
“I saw thrones, and those who sat on them were given authority to judge. . . . They came to life and ruled as kings
with the Christ for 1,000 years. Happy and holy is anyone
having part in the ?rst resurrection; over these the second
death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and
of the Christ, and they will rule as kings with him for the
1,000 years.”—Rev. 20:4, 6.
Additional reference: Rev. 22:5.

34. What is the hope for mankind in general?
“He said: ‘Jesus, remember me when you get into your
Kingdom.’ And [Jesus] said to him: ‘Truly I tell you today,
you will be with me in Paradise.’ ”—Luke 23:42, 43.
“I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before
the throne, and scrolls were opened. But another scroll was
opened; it is the scroll of life. The dead were judged out of
those things written in the scrolls according to their deeds.
And the sea gave up the dead in it, and death and the Grave
gave up the dead in them, and they were judged individually according to their deeds.”—Rev. 20:12, 13.
Additional reference: Rev. 21:1-4.
182

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

35. Why should we hold ?rmly to our hope in the
resurrection of the dead?
“Do not become fearful of those who kill the body but
cannot kill the soul; rather, fear him who can destroy both
soul and body in Gehenna.”—Matt. 10:28.

APPENDIX

183

PART 2

JEHOVAH’S RIGHTEOUS REQUIREMENTS

In your study of the Bible, you have gained knowledge
about what Jehovah asks of you and how to measure up
to his righteous standards. Responding to what you have
learned, you may have made a number of adjustments in
your personal conduct and in your attitude toward life itself. Now that you have resolved to live by Jehovah’s righteous standards, you are in a position to render acceptable service as a minister of the good news.
A review of the following will help you ?x clearly in mind
Jehovah’s righteous requirements and will remind you of
some of the things you can do in order to become one of
his approved servants. This information will impress on you
the importance of doing all things with a good conscience
and to Jehovah’s honor.—2 Cor. 1:12; 1 Tim. 1:19; 1 Pet. 3:
16, 21.

184

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

1. What is the Christian standard for marriage?
“In reply he said: ‘Have you not read that the one who
created them from the beginning made them male and female and said: “For this reason a man will leave his father
and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will
be one ?esh”? So that they are no longer two, but one ?esh.
Therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put
apart.’ ”—Matt. 19:4-6.
“The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife . . . Let ministerial servants be husbands
of one wife.”—1 Tim. 3:2, 12.

2. What is the only Scriptural basis for divorce that
frees one to remarry?
“I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except on
the grounds of sexual immorality, and marries another commits adultery.”—Matt. 19:9.

3. What does the Bible say about separation?
“What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”
—Mark 10:9.
“To the married people I give instructions, not I but the
Lord, that a wife should not separate from her husband. . . .
And a husband should not leave his wife.”—1 Cor. 7:10, 11.
Additional reference: 1 Cor. 7:4, 5, 12-16.

4. Why should those living together as husband and
wife be legally married? If you are married, are you sure
that your marriage is legal and recognized by the
government?
“Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to be
obedient to governments and authorities.”—Titus 3:1.
“Let marriage be honorable among all, and let the marriage bed be without de?lement, for God will judge sexually immoral people.”—Heb. 13:4.
APPENDIX

185

“For the Lord’s sake subject yourselves to every human
creation, whether to a king as being superior or to governors as sent by him to punish wrongdoers but to praise
those who do good.”—1 Pet. 2:13, 14.

5. Why should we show respect for the gift of life?
“With you is the source of life.”—Ps. 36:9.
“The God who made the world . . . gives to all people life
and breath and all things. . . . For by him we have life and
move and exist.”—Acts 17:24, 25, 28.
“Christ Jesus . . . gave himself a corresponding ransom
for all.”—1 Tim. 2:5, 6.
“If you build a new house, you must also make a parapet
for your roof, so that you may not bring bloodguilt on your
house because of someone falling from it.”—Deut. 22:8.

6. How does Jehovah view (a) the unlawful shedding of
human blood? (b) abortion? (c) suicide?
“As for the . . . murderers . . . , their portion will be in the
lake that burns with ?re and sulfur. This means the second
death.”—Rev. 21:8.
“If men should struggle with each other and they hurt a
pregnant woman and she gives birth prematurely but no fatality results, the o?ender must pay the damages imposed
. . . But if a fatality does occur, then you must give life for
life.”—Ex. 21:22, 23.
“Look! All the souls—to me they belong. As the soul of
the father so also the soul of the son—to me they belong.”
—Ezek. 18:4.

7. What responsibility rests on a person who is infected
with a communicable disease that is potentially fatal?
“All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you
also must do to them. This, in fact, is what the Law and the
Prophets mean.”—Matt. 7:12.
186

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“Look out not only for your own interests, but also for
the interests of others.”—Phil. 2:4.

8. To avoid transmitting an infectious or a potentially
fatal disease to others, why should an infected person
(a) not initiate displays of a?ection, such as hugging
and kissing? (b) not react negatively when some choose
not to invite him into their home? (c) Why should a
person who may have been exposed to an infectious
disease voluntarily choose to have a blood test before
beginning a courtship? (d) Why should a person with
a communicable disease inform the coordinator of the
body of elders before getting baptized?
“Do not owe anything to anyone except to love one another; for whoever loves his fellow man has ful?lled the law.
For the law code . . . is summed up in this saying: ‘You must
love your neighbor as yourself.’ Love does not work evil
to one’s neighbor; therefore, love is the law’s ful?llment.”
—Rom. 13:8-10.
“Love . . . does not behave indecently, does not look for
its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not
keep account of the injury.”—1 Cor. 13:4, 5.

9. Why should Christians abstain from blood, and what
does it mean to do so?
“Only ?esh with its life—its blood—you must not eat.”
—Gen. 9:4.
“Whenever you desire it, you may slaughter and eat meat,
according to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given
you . . . But you must not eat the blood; you should pour it
out on the ground like water.”—Deut. 12:15, 16.
“Keep abstaining from things sacri?ced to idols, from
blood, from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality.”
—Acts 15:29.
APPENDIX

187

10. Why are Christians not under the Mosaic Law and its
requirements regarding sacri?ces and the Sabbath?
“Christ is the end of the Law, so that everyone exercising
faith may have righteousness.”—Rom. 10:4.
“Do not let anyone judge you about what you eat and
drink or about the observance of a festival or of the new
moon or of a sabbath. Those things are a shadow of the
things to come, but the reality belongs to the Christ.”—Col.
2:16, 17.
Additional references: Gal. 3:24, 25; Col. 2:13, 14.

11. What quality should characterize our relationship
with our Christian brothers and sisters?
“I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one
another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you
have love among yourselves.”—John 13:34, 35.
“Clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of
union.”—Col. 3:14.
Additional reference: 1 Cor. 13:4-7.

12. How should Christians view the shortcomings of
fellow believers?
“Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one
another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint
against another. Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you
must also do the same.”—Col. 3:13.
“Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.”—1 Pet. 4:8.
Additional references: Prov. 17:9; 19:11; Matt. 7:1-5.

13. If a brother’s sin against you is of a serious nature,
such as fraud or slander, what should you do?
“If your brother commits a sin, go and reveal his fault
between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have
188

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

gained your brother. But if he does not listen, take along
with you one or two more, so that on the testimony of two
or three witnesses every matter may be established. If he
does not listen to them, speak to the congregation. If he
does not listen even to the congregation, let him be to you
just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.”—Matt.
18:15-17.

14. What is the fruitage of the spirit, and how will
cultivating it help us to maintain a ?ne relationship with
others?
“The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.”—Gal. 5:
22, 23.

15. Why must lying be avoided?
“The Devil . . . did not stand fast in the truth, because
truth is not in him. When he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition, because he is a liar and the
father of the lie.”—John 8:44.
“As for . . . all the liars, their portion will be in the lake
that burns with ?re and sulfur.”—Rev. 21:8.
Additional references: Ex. 20:16; 2 Cor. 6:4, 7.

16. What is the Christian view of stealing?
“Let none of you su?er as a murderer or a thief.”—1 Pet.
4:15.
“Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do
hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may
have something to share with someone in need.”—Eph. 4:28.

17. What does the Bible say about the use of alcoholic
beverages?
“Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine
with a cheerful heart, for already the true God has found
pleasure in your works.”—Eccl. 9:7.
APPENDIX

189

“Do not drink water any longer, but take a little wine for
the sake of your stomach and your frequent cases of sickness.”—1 Tim. 5:23.

18. What is the Christian view of drunkenness?
“Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled. Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, . . . greedy people,
drunkards . . . will not inherit God’s Kingdom.”—1 Cor. 6:
9, 10.
“The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, . . .
not a drunkard.”—1 Tim. 3:2, 3.
Additional reference: 1 Cor. 5:11.

19. What is the Christian view of heavy drinking, even if
it is not to the point of drunkenness?
“Do not be among those who drink too much wine.”
—Prov. 23:20.
“Ministerial servants should likewise be serious, . . . not
indulging in a lot of wine.”—1 Tim. 3:8.
Additional reference: 1 Pet. 4:3.

20. Why should Christians abstain from all nonmedical
use of addictive or mind-altering natural or synthetic
substances?
“I appeal to you by the compassions of God, brothers, to
present your bodies as a living sacri?ce, holy and acceptable to God, a sacred service with your power of reason.
And stop being molded by this system of things, but be
transformed by making your mind over, so that you may
prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect
will of God.”—Rom. 12:1, 2.
“Let us cleanse ourselves of every de?lement of ?esh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.”—2 Cor. 7:1.
Additional references: 1 Pet. 4:7; Rev. 21:8, Int.
190

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

21. What does the Bible say about sexual immorality
(por·neia), which includes adultery, fornication, sexual
relations with another person of the same sex, and
other ungodly sexual conduct?
“The works of the ?esh are plainly seen, and they are sexual immorality, uncleanness, brazen conduct, . . . and things
like these. . . . Those who practice such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom.”—Gal. 5:19-21.
“Do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled. Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality . . . will not
inherit God’s Kingdom.”—1 Cor. 6:9, 10.
“God gave them over to uncontrolled sexual passion, for
their females changed the natural use of themselves into
one contrary to nature; likewise also the males left the natural use of the female and became violently in?amed in their
lust toward one another, males with males, working what is
obscene and receiving in themselves the full penalty, which
was due for their error.”—Rom. 1:26, 27.
“Let marriage be honorable among all, and let the marriage bed be without de?lement, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.”—Heb. 13:4.
Additional references: Mark 7:20-23; Eph. 5:5; 1 Pet. 4:3; Rev.
21:8.

22. By adhering to what Bible counsel will you be able
to resist temptations to engage in sexual immorality?
“Keep your minds ?xed on the things above, not on the
things on the earth. Deaden, therefore, your body members
that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and
greediness, which is idolatry.”—Col. 3:2, 5.
APPENDIX

191

“Brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are
of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever things are
virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue
considering these things.”—Phil. 4:8.

23. Why must a Christian avoid becoming involved in
any form of gambling?
“You are among those forsaking Jehovah, those forgetting my holy mountain, those setting a table for the god of
Good Luck, and those ?lling up cups of mixed wine for the
god of Destiny.”—Isa. 65:11.
“Do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled. Those who are . . .
thieves, greedy people . . . will not inherit God’s Kingdom.”
—1 Cor. 6:9, 10.

24. If a person commits a serious sin out of weakness
but wants help to be restored to Jehovah’s favor, what
should he immediately do?
“Finally I confessed my sin to you; I did not cover my error. I said: ‘I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah.’ ”
—Ps. 32:5.
“Is there anyone su?ering hardship among you? Let him
carry on prayer. Is there anyone in good spirits? Let him
sing psalms. Is there anyone sick among you? Let him call
the elders of the congregation to him, and let them pray
over him, applying oil to him in the name of Jehovah. And
the prayer of faith will make the sick one well, and Jehovah
will raise him up. Also, if he has committed sins, he will be
forgiven.”—Jas. 5:13-15.
Additional references: Prov. 28:13; 1 John 2:1, 2.
192

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

25. In addition to confessing his own sins, each person
has what responsibility regarding serious wrongdoing by
others that could threaten the spiritual or moral
cleanness of the congregation?
“If someone sins because he has heard a public call to
testify and he is a witness or has seen or learned about it
and he does not report it, then he will answer for his error.”—Lev. 5:1.

26. What is the proper viewpoint to have if one is
Scripturally reproved?
“My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, and do
not loathe his reproof.”—Prov. 3:11.
“The commandment is a lamp, and the law is a light, and
the reproofs of discipline are the way to life.”—Prov. 6:23.

27. What action does the congregation take when a
person in its midst proves to be an unrepentant violator
of God’s commandments?
“In my letter I wrote you to stop keeping company with
sexually immoral people, not meaning entirely with the sexually immoral people of this world or the greedy people
or extortioners or idolaters. Otherwise, you would actually
have to get out of the world. But now I am writing you to
stop keeping company with anyone called a brother who is
sexually immoral or a greedy person or an idolater or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with
such a man. For what do I have to do with judging those
outside? Do you not judge those inside, while God judges
those outside? ‘Remove the wicked person from among
yourselves.’ ”—1 Cor. 5:9-13.

28. What is idolatry? What are some forms of idolatry
that Christians must guard against today?
“You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form
like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth
APPENDIX

193

below or in the waters under the earth. You must not bow
down to them nor be enticed to serve them, for I, Jehovah
your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion.”—Ex.
20:4, 5.
“Guard yourselves from idols.”—1 John 5:21.
Additional references: Isa. 42:8; Jer. 10:14, 15.

29. What is the position of a Christian regarding the
world alienated from God?
“They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the
world.”—John 17:16.
“Do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of
the world is making himself an enemy of God.”—Jas. 4:4.

30. What was Jesus’ attitude toward participation in the
political a?airs of the world?
“The Devil took him along to an unusually high mountain
and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory. And he said to him: ‘All these things I will give you if
you fall down and do an act of worship to me.’ Then Jesus
said to him: ‘Go away, Satan! For it is written: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you
must render sacred service.”’ ”—Matt. 4:8-10.
“Jesus, knowing that they were about to come and seize
him to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain all
alone.”—John 6:15.

31. When a person separates himself from the world
and becomes a Christian, what treatment should he
expect from those in the world?
“If you were part of the world, the world would be fond of
what is its own. Now because you are no part of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, for this reason the
world hates you. . . . If they have persecuted me, they will
also persecute you.”—John 15:19, 20.
194

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.”—2 Tim. 3:12.
“They are puzzled that you do not continue running with
them in the same decadent course of debauchery, so they
speak abusively of you.”—1 Pet. 4:4.

32. How does being separate from the world a?ect a
Christian in his choice of secular employment?
“Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do
hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may
have something to share with someone in need.”—Eph. 4:28.
“The Devil . . . is a liar and the father of the lie.”—John
8:44.
“He will render judgment among many peoples and set
matters straight respecting mighty nations far away. They
will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into
pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation,
nor will they learn war anymore.”—Mic. 4:3.
“I heard another voice out of heaven say: ‘Get out of her
[Babylon the Great], my people, if you do not want to share
with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part
of her plagues.’ ”—Rev. 18:4.

33. What Bible principles should a Christian apply
regarding his choice of entertainment and recreation?
“Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.”
—1 Cor. 15:33.
“Brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are
of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever things are
virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue
considering these things.”—Phil. 4:8.
“Do not love either the world or the things in the world.”
—1 John 2:15.
APPENDIX

195

“Jehovah . . . hates anyone who loves violence.”—Ps. 11:5.
“Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise
but as wise persons, making the best use of your time, because the days are wicked. On this account stop being unreasonable, but keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
Also, do not get drunk with wine, in which there is debauchery, but keep getting ?lled with spirit. Speak to one another with psalms, praises to God, and spiritual songs, singing
and accompanying yourselves with music in your hearts to
Jehovah, always giving thanks to our God and Father for
everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.”—Eph. 5:
15-20.
“Let sexual immorality and every sort of uncleanness or
greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as is
proper for holy people.”—Eph. 5:3.

34. Why would it be improper for true Christians to
share in worship with other religious groups?
“I heard another voice out of heaven say: ‘Get out of her
[Babylon the Great], my people, if you do not want to share
with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part
of her plagues. For her sins have massed together clear
up to heaven, and God has called her acts of injustice to
mind.’ ”—Rev. 18:4, 5.
Additional references: Matt. 7:13, 14, 21-23; 1 Cor. 10:20;
2 Cor. 6:14-18.

35. What is the only religious ceremony that Christians
are commanded to observe?
“He took a loaf, gave thanks, broke it, and gave it to
them, saying: ‘This means my body, which is to be given in
your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.’ ”—Luke
22:19.
Additional reference: 1 Cor. 11:23-26.
196

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

36. How can you determine whether you should
participate in celebrations that are popular in your
community?
“They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the
world.”—John 17:16.
“You cannot be partaking of ‘the table of Jehovah’ and the
table of demons.”—1 Cor. 10:21.
“They mingled with the nations and adopted their ways.
They kept serving their idols, and these became a snare to
them.”—Ps. 106:35, 36.
“The time that has passed by is su?cient for you to have
done the will of the nations when you carried on in acts of
brazen conduct, unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties, drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries.”—1 Pet. 4:3.
“The living know that they will die, but the dead know
nothing at all.”—Eccl. 9:5.

37. How does the Bible portray birthday celebrations?
How does this a?ect your view of birthday celebrations?
“When Herod’s birthday was being celebrated, the daughter of Herodias danced for the occasion and pleased Herod
so much that he promised with an oath to give her whatever
she asked. Then she, at her mother’s prompting, said: ‘Give
me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.’ Grieved
though he was, the king, out of regard for his oaths and
for those dining with him, commanded it to be given. So he
sent and had John beheaded in the prison. His head was
brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought
it to her mother.”—Matt. 14:6-11.
Additional references: Gen. 40:20-22; Eccl. 7:1, 8.

APPENDIX

197

PART 3

JEHOVAH’S ARRANGEMENT OF THINGS

Through your study of the Bible, you have learned that
Jehovah has a purpose to bring all things back into subjection to himself, just as they were in the beginning. (1 Cor.
15:24-28; Eph. 1:8-10) Having reached this point in your
study, you are no doubt eager to ?nd your place in Jehovah’s arrangement and to be submissive to his rule. The
following questions and Scripture references will help you
to examine your own understanding of submission to Jehovah’s arrangement, whether in the congregation, in the
family, or in regard to the political elements of this system
of things. You will no doubt deepen your appreciation for
Jehovah’s arrangements to educate and build up his people spiritually. These include congregation meetings that
you can attend and participate in as your circumstances
allow.
Additionally, this section will focus on the importance of
having a regular share in the Kingdom-preaching work,
helping others to come to know Jehovah and what he is
doing for mankind. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Finally, it will
impress on your mind the seriousness of your dedication
to Jehovah God and your baptism. You can be certain
that Jehovah appreciates your sincere response to his undeserved kindness expressed in your behalf.

198

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

1. In God’s arrangement of things, who is the head of
the married woman?
“You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as it is becoming in the Lord.”—Col. 3:18.
“Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the
Lord, because a husband is head of his wife just as the
Christ is head of the congregation, he being a savior of this
body.”—Eph. 5:22, 23.

2. How should a husband exercise headship over his
wife?
“Husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. A
man who loves his wife loves himself, for no man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it, just as the
Christ does the congregation.”—Eph. 5:28, 29.
“You husbands, keep on loving your wives and do not be
bitterly angry with them.”—Col. 3:19.

3. How should a Christian wife view subjection to her
husband if he is an unbeliever?
“You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, so that if
any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without
a word through the conduct of their wives, because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with
deep respect.”—1 Pet. 3:1, 2.

4. Who is primarily responsible before God for the
training and disciplining of children?
“Fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on
bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.”—Eph. 6:4.
“Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father, and do
not forsake the instruction of your mother.”—Prov. 1:8.

5. What responsibility do children have in the family
arrangement?
“Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the
Lord, for this is righteous. ‘Honor your father and your
APPENDIX

199

mother’ is the ?rst command with a promise: ‘That it may
go well with you and you may remain a long time on the
earth.’ ”—Eph. 6:1-3.
“You children, be obedient to your parents in everything,
for this is well-pleasing to the Lord.”—Col. 3:20.

6. What is the proper attitude for Christians to maintain
toward worldly rulers?
“Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities, for there is no authority except by God; the existing
authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God.”
—Rom. 13:1.
“Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to be
obedient to governments and authorities.”—Titus 3:1.

7. Why must a Christian pay all taxes and assessments
demanded by law?
“Render to all their dues: to the one who calls for the tax,
the tax; to the one who calls for the tribute, the tribute; to
the one who calls for fear, such fear; to the one who calls
for honor, such honor.”—Rom. 13:7.
Additional reference: Luke 20:21-25.

8. Are there any circumstances under which a Christian
would refuse to obey worldly rulers?
“With that they called them and ordered them not to say
anything at all or to teach on the basis of the name of Jesus. But in reply Peter and John said to them: ‘Whether it is
right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God,
judge for yourselves. But as for us, we cannot stop speaking
about the things we have seen and heard.’ ”—Acts 4:18-20.
“In answer Peter and the other apostles said: ‘We must
obey God as ruler rather than men.’ ”—Acts 5:29.

9. Should Christians comply with legal requirements
that do not con?ict with God’s laws, such as registering
200

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

marriages and births, responding to census inquiries, or
obtaining required licenses and permits?
“In those days a decree went out . . . for all the inhabited earth to be registered. . . . Of course, Joseph also went
up from Galilee . . . to get registered with Mary, who had
been given him in marriage.”—Luke 2:1-5.
“Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to be
obedient to governments and authorities.”—Titus 3:1.

10. What is the headship arrangement in the Christian
congregation?
“I want you to know that the head of every man is the
Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the
head of the Christ is God.”—1 Cor. 11:3.

11. Who is the Head of the Christian congregation?
“[Christ] is the image of the invisible God, the ?rstborn of
all creation; because by means of him all other things were
created in the heavens and on the earth, the things visible
and the things invisible, whether they are thrones or lordships or governments or authorities. All other things have
been created through him and for him. Also, he is before
all other things, and by means of him all other things were
made to exist, and he is the head of the body, the congregation.”—Col. 1:15-18.

12. What is the Governing Body of the Christian
congregation, and what role does it ?ll today?
“Some men came down from Judea and began to teach
the brothers: ‘Unless you get circumcised according to the
custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.’ But after quite a
bit of dissension and disputing by Paul and Barnabas with
them, it was arranged for Paul, Barnabas, and some of the
others to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem regarding this issue.”—Acts 15:1, 2.
APPENDIX

201

“As they traveled on through the cities, they would deliver to them for observance the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders who were in Jerusalem.
Then, indeed, the congregations continued to be made ?rm
in the faith and to increase in number day by day.”—Acts 16:
4, 5.
“Who really is the faithful and discreet slave whom his
master appointed over his domestics, to give them their
food at the proper time? Happy is that slave if his master
on coming ?nds him doing so! Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.”—Matt. 24:45-47.

13. By what visible means is Christ’s headship
represented in the congregation?
“Pay attention to yourselves and to all the ?ock, among
which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the
blood of his own Son.”—Acts 20:28.
“I make this appeal to the elders among you: Shepherd
the ?ock of God under your care, serving as overseers, not
under compulsion, but willingly before God; not for love of
dishonest gain, but eagerly; not lording it over those who
are God’s inheritance, but becoming examples to the ?ock.”
—1 Pet. 5:1-3.

14. How do members of the congregation demonstrate
submission to Christ’s headship?
“Remember those who are taking the lead among you,
who have spoken the word of God to you, and as you contemplate how their conduct turns out, imitate their faith.”
—Heb. 13:7.
“Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you
and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over you as
those who will render an account, so that they may do this
with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging
to you.”—Heb. 13:17.
202

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

15. Whose ideas are recorded in the Bible? Why should
you regularly study God’s Word and set aside time each
week for family worship?
“All Scripture is inspired of God and bene?cial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”
—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
“His delight is in the law of Jehovah, and he reads His
law in an undertone day and night. He will be like a tree
planted by streams of water, a tree that produces fruit in
its season, the foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.”—Ps. 1:2, 3.
Additional references: Deut. 17:18-20; Prov. 2:1-6; 1 Thess.
2:13.

16. Why is it bene?cial to attend the meetings
arranged by the congregation? What e?orts do you
make to do so?
“My foot is standing on level ground; in the great congregation, I will praise Jehovah.”—Ps. 26:12.
“Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and
?ne works, not forsaking our meeting together, as some
have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the
more so as you see the day drawing near.”—Heb. 10:24, 25.
Additional references: Ps. 35:18; 149:1.

17. Why should you participate in congregation
meetings as your circumstances allow?
“I will declare your name to my brothers; in the midst of
the congregation I will praise you.”—Ps. 22:22.
“As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens his friend.”
—Prov. 27:17.
“Let us always o?er to God a sacri?ce of praise, that is,
the fruit of our lips that make public declaration to his
name.”—Heb. 13:15.
APPENDIX

203

18. Why must our Christian faith be accompanied by
works?
“Faith by itself, without works, is dead. Nevertheless,
someone will say: ‘You have faith, and I have works. Show
me your faith without the works, and I will show you my
faith by my works.’ Indeed, just as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.”—Jas. 2:17,
18, 26.

19. What urgent work does the Bible set out for all
Christians?
“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all
the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then
the end will come.”—Matt. 24:14.
“Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the
things I have commanded you.”—Matt. 28:19, 20.

20. With whom should we share the good news of the
Kingdom?
“I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that
were pro?table nor from teaching you publicly and from
house to house. But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews
and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in
our Lord Jesus.”—Acts 20:20, 21.
“He began to reason . . . every day in the marketplace with
those who happened to be on hand.”—Acts 17:17.

21. Why should you take seriously your responsibility to
share the good news with others?
“I call you to witness this very day that I am clean from
the blood of all men, for I have not held back from telling
you all the counsel of God.”—Acts 20:26, 27.
204

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

“If I am declaring the good news, it is no reason for me
to boast, for necessity is laid upon me. Really, woe to me if
I do not declare the good news!”—1 Cor. 9:16.

22. How can we give material support to the Kingdom
work?
“Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, with the ?rstfruits of all your produce; then your storehouses will be
completely ?lled, and your vats will over?ow with new
wine.”—Prov. 3:9, 10.
“Whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and
whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. Let
each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.”
—2 Cor. 9:6, 7.

23. How can we demonstrate our love for brothers and
sisters who come to be in need of material assistance?
“If a brother or a sister is lacking clothing and enough
food for the day, yet one of you says to them, ‘Go in peace;
keep warm and well fed,’ but you do not give them what they
need for their body, of what bene?t is it?”—Jas. 2:15, 16.
Additional references: Prov. 3:27; Jas. 1:27.

24. What should be our attitude toward giving of
ourselves and of our material possessions in Jehovah’s
service?
“Who am I and who are my people that we should be in
a position to make voluntary o?erings like this? For everything is from you, and we have given to you what comes
from your own hand.”—1 Chron. 29:14.
“Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not
grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful
giver.”—2 Cor. 9:7.
APPENDIX

205

25. What attitude should we have when we are
persecuted or undergoing trials?
“Happy are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs
to them. Happy are you when people reproach you and
persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing
against you for my sake. Rejoice and be overjoyed, since
your reward is great in the heavens; for in that way they
persecuted the prophets prior to you.”—Matt. 5:10-12.
“Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials, knowing as you do that this tested quality of your
faith produces endurance.”—Jas. 1:2, 3.
“They went out from before the Sanhedrin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in
behalf of his name.”—Acts 5:41.

26. To whom should we pray, and in whose name should
we pray?
“O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts will come.”
—Ps. 65:2.
“In that day you will ask me no question at all. Most truly I say to you, if you ask the Father for anything, he will
give it to you in my name.”—John 16:23.
Additional reference: John 14:6.

27. How should we pray?
“When you pray, do not act like the hypocrites, for they
like to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners
of the main streets to be seen by men. Truly I say to you,
they have their reward in full. But when you pray, go into
your private room and, after shutting your door, pray to
your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks
on in secret will repay you. When praying, do not say the
same things over and over again as the people of the nations do, for they imagine they will get a hearing for their
206

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

use of many words. So do not be like them, for your Father
knows what you need even before you ask him.”—Matt. 6:
5-8.

28. What are some of the things you can pray about?
“You must pray, then, this way: ‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sancti?ed. Let your Kingdom come.
Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth. Give
us today our bread for this day; and forgive us our debts,
as we also have forgiven our debtors. And do not bring us
into temptation, but deliver us from the wicked one.’ ”—Matt.
6:9-13.
“This is the con?dence that we have toward him, that no
matter what we ask according to his will, he hears us.”
—1 John 5:14.

29. What e?ect might our conduct have on our prayers?
“You husbands, in the same way, continue dwelling with
[your wives] according to knowledge. Assign them honor as
to a weaker vessel, the feminine one, since they are also
heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life, in order for
your prayers not to be hindered. For the eyes of Jehovah
are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their supplication, but the face of Jehovah is against those doing bad
things.”—1 Pet. 3:7, 12.
Additional reference: Isa. 1:15-17.

30. Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses baptize in water those
who embrace the Christian faith?
“Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the holy spirit.”—Matt. 28:19.
“In the course of those days, Jesus came from Nazareth
of Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.”—Mark
1:9.
APPENDIX

207

31. Why is it appropriate for dedicated and baptized
Christians to be called Jehovah’s Witnesses?
“‘You are my witnesses,’ declares Jehovah, ‘yes, my servant whom I have chosen, so that you may know and have
faith in me and understand that I am the same One. Before
me no God was formed, and after me there has been none.
I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.’ ‘I am the
One who declared and saved and made known when there
was no foreign god among you. So you are my witnesses,’
declares Jehovah, ‘and I am God.’ ”—Isa. 43:10-12.

208

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

CONCLUDING DISCUSSION WITH BAPTISM CANDIDATES

Baptisms are usually held at assemblies and conventions
of Jehovah’s Witnesses. At the conclusion of the baptism
talk, the speaker will ask the baptism candidates to stand
and answer the following two questions in a loud voice:
1. On the basis of the sacri?ce of Jesus Christ,
have you repented of your sins and dedicated yourself
to Jehovah to do his will?
2. Do you understand that your dedication and baptism
identify you as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in
association with God’s spirit-directed organization?
A?rmative answers to these questions constitute a
“public declaration” by the baptism candidates that they
have put faith in the ransom and have unreservedly dedicated themselves to Jehovah. (Rom. 10:9, 10) Baptism
candidates will want to give prayerful thought to these
questions in advance so that they can answer in harmony
with their personal convictions.

APPENDIX

209

What is appropriate attire for baptism? (John 15:19;
Phil. 1:10; 1 Tim. 2:9)
Those getting baptized will want to wear modest clothing, keeping in mind the importance of the occasion. A revealing swimsuit would be unbecoming attire for a
Christian and should not be worn. Likewise, it would be inappropriate for one to be unkempt or slovenly in appearance. Further, it would not be ?tting to wear garments with
sayings or slogans. By maintaining the dignity of the occasion, we will continue to stand out as di?erent from the
world.
How should a person conduct himself when getting
baptized? (Luke 3:21, 22)
Jesus’ baptism set the example for Christian baptisms
today. He appreciated that baptism is a serious step, and
this was re?ected in his attitude and actions. Hence, the
baptism site would not be the place for jesting, swimming,
or other conduct that would detract from the seriousness
of the occasion; nor would a new Christian carry on as
though he had won a great victory. While baptism is a joyful occasion, that joy should be expressed in a digni?ed
manner.

Even after you get baptized, why will it be vital for
you to maintain a good schedule of personal study and
to share regularly in the ministry?
How will staying in close association with the
congregation help you to carry out your dedication to
Jehovah?
Are you now thoroughly convinced that you should get
baptized at the earliest opportunity?
210

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONGREGATION ELDERS

When an unbaptized publisher makes known to the elders his desire to get baptized, he should be encouraged
to review carefully the “Questions for Those Desiring to Get
Baptized,” found on pages 170-208. His attention should
be directed to “A Message to the Unbaptized Publisher,”
beginning on page 167, which explains how he can prepare
for the discussions with the elders. As noted there, the
prospective baptism candidate may use his personal notes
and may have this book open during the discussions. However, there is no need for someone to review the questions
with him before he meets with the elders.
The coordinator of the body of elders should be informed
of the person’s desire to get baptized. After the person requesting baptism has had time to read the information, the
coordinator of the body of elders will make arrangements
for some of the elders to have discussions with the person
based on that material. It is not necessary to wait until an
assembly is announced before having these discussions.
The three parts can usually be covered in three sessions
of about one hour each, although there is no objection to
using more time if that is necessary. Neither the candidate
nor the elder should be rushed when going through the
questions. On the other hand, the assigned elders will want
to make this discussion a priority in their schedule. Where
possible, a di?erent elder should be assigned to handle
each of the sessions. It would be good to open and close
each session with prayer.
It is usually best to review the questions with each baptism candidate individually, not in a group. By having a
APPENDIX

211

candidate comment on every question, the elders will get
a clear picture of his depth of understanding, leaving no
doubt as to whether he is ready for baptism or not. Additionally, the one requesting baptism may be more inclined
to express himself in this setting. A husband and wife may
have these sessions together.
When the baptism candidate is a sister, the discussions
should be held in such a way that they are held in plain
view of others but out of earshot. If it is necessary to take
along another person, he should be an elder or a ministerial servant, depending on the section being reviewed, as
outlined in the next paragraph.
In congregations that have very few elders, capable ministerial servants who have demonstrated good judgment
and discernment may review with individuals the questions for baptism dealing with doctrinal matters. These
are found in “Part 1Elementary Bible Teachings” and
“Part 3Jehovah’s Arrangement of Things.” Only elders
should consider “Part 2Jehovah’s Righteous Requirements.” If the congregation does not have su?cient quali?ed brothers, the circuit overseer may be contacted to determine if a nearby congregation may be able to assist.
The elders will make sure that a person desiring baptism
has acquired a reasonable understanding of basic Bible
teachings. Additionally, they will want to ascertain whether
the prospective minister deeply appreciates the truth and
demonstrates proper respect for Jehovah’s organization. If
the person does not understand primary Bible teachings,
the elders will arrange for him to receive personal assistance so that he can qualify for baptism at a later time.
Others may need to be given time to demonstrate more
appreciation for ?eld service or submissiveness to organi212

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

zational arrangements. It will be up to the elders to use
discretion in apportioning the hour or so spent in each session in order to discern fully whether the person is ready
for baptism. Although more time may be spent on certain
questions and less time on others, all the questions should
be reviewed.
The elders assigned to review these questions will meet
after the third session and decide whether the person
should be accepted for baptism or not. Elders will take into
consideration the background, ability, and other circumstances of each person. Our interest is in those who have
turned their hearts to Jehovah and who have grasped the
sense of fundamental Bible truths. With your loving assistance, those getting baptized will be adequately prepared
to accomplish their important assignment as ministers of
the good news.
Thereafter, one or two of the assigned elders should
meet with the person and inform him whether he quali?es for baptism or not. If the person quali?es, the elders should review with him the “Concluding Discussion
With Baptism Candidates,” found on pages 209-210. If the
candidate has not yet completed his study of the Bible
Teach and “God’s Love” books, the elders should encourage him to do so after baptism. This discussion need take
only ten minutes or less.
One year after baptism, two elders should meet with
the baptized publisher to provide encouragement and
helpful suggestions. One of the elders should be the person’s group overseer. If the new one is a youth, his believing parent(s) should be present. The spirit of the meeting
should be very warm and encouraging. The elders will discuss his spiritual progress and o?er practical suggestions
APPENDIX

213

on how he can continue in a good routine of personal
study and daily Bible reading, weekly family worship, faithful meeting attendance and participation, and weekly ?eld
service activity. (Phil. 3:16) If he has not completed his
study of the Bible Teach and “God’s Love” books, the elders should make arrangements for someone to help him
do so. The elders should be generous with loving commendation. Usually, counsel and suggestions on one or two
points are su?cient.

214

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

SUBJECT
INDEX

Note: The location of most references below is indicated by
the chapter number followed by the paragraph number. For
example, the ?rst reference under “Announcements” is
“contributions: 12:6.” This means that the information
regarding announcements about contributions is found in
Chapter 12, paragraph 6.
Announcements
contributions: 12:6
disassociation: 14:33
disfellowshipping: 14:29
reinstatement: 14:36
reproof: 14:24
unbaptized publishers: 8:12; 14:39-40
Assemblies
(See Circuit assembly)
Assembly Halls: 11:18-21
Attendants: 11:14
Auxiliary pioneers: 10:11-12
Baptism
at assemblies, conventions: 7:24, 26
children: pp. 165-166
meaning of: 8:16-18
ordination: 8:3
review questions: pp. 170-208
unbaptized publishers: pp. 167-169
Bethel service: 10:19-20
Bible studies
directing student to organization: 9:20-21
encouraging student to witness informally: 8:5
importance: 9:16-17
reporting: 8:26
Branch o?ce
contributions to: 12:2-4
dress and grooming when visiting: 13:13
SUBJECT INDEX

215

responsibility: 4:13
when contact is cut o?: 17:15-17
Children
assisting in?rm parents and grandparents: 12:14
meetings: 7:2; 11:13-14
school activities: 13:22-24
spiritual progress: 8:13-15; 10:26; pp. 165-166
wrongdoing: 14:37
young brothers reaching out: 6:14
Circuit assembly
expenses: 12:8-11
locations: 11:18
organization: 5:49
Circuit overseer
consulting with to expand ministry: 10:6, 10, 16, 20
foreign-language groups: 9:44
hospitality for: 5:50
recommends new congregations: 7:22
visits: 5:41-48
Cleanliness; Cleanness
Kingdom Hall: 11:7-8
moral, spiritual: 13:6-7
physical: 13:8-12
Committee(s)
Branch: 4:13; 5:51-54
Congregation Service: 5:35
Country: 5:53
Hospital Liaison: 5:40
judicial: 14:21-28, 34-37
Kingdom Hall Operating: 11:8
Congregation
(See also Kingdom Hall; Meetings)
new and small: 7:22-23
organized theocratically: 1:3; 4:4-11
unity: 13:28-30
216

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

Congregation publishers
(See also Unbaptized publishers)
in?rm: 8:29
moving: 8:30
new: 8:5-6
personal assistance: 5:28-29, 33; 7:21; 9:7, 15, 19
quali?cations: 8:8
young: 8:13-14
Congregation Service Committee: 5:35
Congregation’s Publisher Record card: 5:44; 8:10, 30
Construction service: 10:21-23
Construction Group: 10:23
construction servant: 10:23
construction volunteer: 10:23
expatriate construction servant: 10:23
Local Design/Construction volunteer: 10:23
Contributions: 3:13; 11:6-7, 15; 12:2-11
Conventions: 7:25-27
Coordinator of the body of elders
audit of accounts: 12:7
baptism candidates: 8:18; pp. 211-214
circuit overseer’s visit: 5:42-44
general responsibility: 5:26
judicial announcements: 14:24, 29, 33, 36
Life and Ministry Meeting: 7:18
new publishers: 8:8, 14
Corporations: 4:12
Dedication and baptism
(See Baptism)
Disassociation: 14:30-33
Disaster relief: 12:15; 16:11
Disfellowshipping: 14:25-29
Dress and grooming
leisure activities: 13:14
meetings: 11:12, 21
ministerial servants: 6:5
SUBJECT INDEX

217

ministry: 13:12
those given privileges: 6:9
visiting Bethel: 13:13
Elders
appointed theocratically: 4:8
attitude toward: 3:14; 5:38-39
cooperation among: 5:21
elderly or ill: 5:23-24
groups and pregroups: 9:42-44
keeping the congregation clean: 14:19-40
meetings: 5:37
positions of responsibility: 5:25-36, 40
quali?cations: 5:4-20
reaching out: 5:22
shepherds: 5:1-3; 14:7-12
Exemplary
de?nition: 6:9
“Faithful and discreet slave”
demonstrating trust in: 3:12-15
identifying: 3:4-6
subjection to: 15:7
Field service groups
cleaning Kingdom Hall: 11:7
making assignments to: 5:35
meetings for ?eld service: 7:20-21
overseers: 5:29-34
role of ministerial servants: 6:12
territories: 9:31, 33
Financial support
circuit: 12:8-11
congregation: 11:6-7; 12:5-7
worldwide: 11:15; 12:2-4
Foreign-language ?eld
groups and pregroups: 9:42-44
householder speaks another language: 9:38-41
218

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

language classes: 10:10
multilingual areas: 9:35-37
Funerals: 11:10-11
Goals
Bethel service: 10:19-20
circuit work: 10:16
construction service: 10:21-23
?eld missionaries: 10:15
importance of: 10:24-26
learning another language: 10:10
pioneer service: 10:11-14
publishers: 10:4-5
realistic: 8:37
serving where the need is greater: 10:6-9
theocratic schools: 10:17-18
Governing Body
demonstrating trust in: 3:12-15
identifying: 3:1-6
reasons to follow direction of: 3:9-11; 4:9-11
Headquarters representatives: 5:55-56
Headship
congregation: 3:14; 4:15; 15:7
family: 15:9-10
Jehovah’s organization: 1:9-10; 2:5, 9-10; 15:1-2
superior authorities: 15:11
Hospital Liaison Committees and Patient
Visitation Groups: 5:40
Inactive Christians: 8:26; 14:32
Jehovah God
drawing close to: 17:1-3
Universal Sovereign: 15:1-4
Jesus Christ
Fine Shepherd: 2:6; 5:1
Head of congregation: 1:10; 2:5
High Priest: 2:4
Minister: 8:1-2; 9:1
SUBJECT INDEX

219

Redeemer: 2:3
subjection to Jehovah: 15:5
Judicial committees: 14:21-28, 34-37
JW.ORG: 9:24-25
Kingdom Hall
cleaning and maintenance: 11:7-8
construction: 10:21-23; 11:4-5, 15-17
dedication: 11:4
expenses: 11:6; 12:5-6
library: 7:19
multiple congregations: 11:8-9
special uses: 11:10-11
Literature
caring for supplies: 12:16
foreign-language: 9:36, 38
how ?nanced: 12:2-4
value in the ministry: 9:22-23
Lord’s Evening Meal: 7:28-30
Marking disorderly ones: 14:9-12
Meetings
attendants: 11:14
children attend: 11:13
circuit assemblies: 7:24
Congregation Bible Study: 7:17
conventions: 7:25-26
during visit of circuit overseer: 5:43, 47
elders: 5:37
?rst century: 7:3; 11:2
for ?eld service: 7:20-21; 9:45
importance: 3:12; 7:4, 27; 15:7
Israelites: 11:1
meeting places: 11:1-5, 18-19
Our Christian Life and Ministry: 7:14-19
promoting business ventures at: 13:27
Public Meeting: 7:5-10
220

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

purpose: 7:1-2
Watchtower Study: 7:11-13
when sisters conduct: 7:23
when under ban: 17:15-17
Memorial: 7:28-30
Ministerial servants
duties: 6:7-12; 11:14
quali?cations: 6:3-6
reaching out: 6:14
showing appreciation for: 6:1-2, 15
Missionary service: 10:15, 18
Ordination: 8:3
Organization
heavenly part: 1:8-13
Our Christian Life and Ministry
—Meeting Workbook: 7:14-18
Overseers
(See Elders)
Personal di?erences
resolving minor: 14:5-6
resolving serious: 14:13-20
Pioneers: 10:11-14
Poor people: 12:12-15
Preaching the good news
divine commission: 8:2
encouraging Bible student to witness informally: 8:5
?rst century: 8:1-2; 9:1, 4
group witnessing: 9:45-46
householder speaks another language: 9:38-41
house to house: 9:3-9
importance: 9:5-8; 10:1-2
informally: 9:26-29
literature: 9:22-23
meetings for ?eld service: 7:20-21
multilingual areas: 9:35-37
SUBJECT INDEX

221

oversight by service overseer: 5:28
personal appearance: 13:12
personal assistance: 5:28-29, 33; 7:21; 9:7, 15, 19
public: 9:11-12
quali?cations: 8:6-9, 13-15
reporting: 8:19-29, 31-36
return visits: 9:14-15
taking the lead: 5:3, 17, 29-33; 6:4
territory: 9:30-34
under ban: 17:13-18
using jw.org: 9:24-25
young people: 8:13-15
Public Meeting: 7:5-10
Publishers
(See Congregation publishers; Unbaptized publishers)
Recreation and entertainment: 13:15-21
Reinstatement: 14:34-36
Reports
circuit overseers: 5:46, 50; 9:44
importance: 8:19-22, 31-36
publishers: 5:34; 8:10, 23-29
when away from home: 8:30
Reproof: 14:4, 23-24
Resolutions: 12:6, 9, 11
School activities: 13:22-24
Secretary: 5:27; 8:30
Secular work: 13:25-26
Service committee
(See Congregation Service Committee)
Service overseer: 5:28, 32; 9:31, 37, 45
Serving where need is greater: 10:6-9
Sisters
construction service: 10:21
theocratic schools: 10:17-18
when no quali?ed brothers are present: 6:9; 7:23
222

ORGANIZED TO DO JEHOVAH’S WILL

Special pioneers: 10:11, 14, 17-18
Subjection
(See Headship)
Territory
group and personal: 9:31-34
multilingual: 9:36-37
records: 9:31
Tests, trials: 13:4-5; 17:4-19
Unbaptized publishers
children: 8:13-15
quali?cations: 8:6-12
when building or renovating their Kingdom Hall: 11:17
wrongdoing: 14:38-40
Unity
basis: 1:6-7; 13:28-29
blessings: 4:15; 5:57; 13:30-31
challenges: 14:3; 17:6
elders: 5:13, 21
international: 16:6-11
maintaining: 17:20
under Christ’s headship: 2:9-11; 4:10-11
Watchtower Study: 7:11-13
Weddings: 11:10-11
Wrongdoing
(See also Disassociation; Disfellowshipping; Marking
disorderly ones; Personal di?erences; Reinstatement)
against another Christian: 14:5-6, 13-20
announcements regarding: 14:24, 29, 33, 39-40
children: 14:37
serious: 14:21-33
unbaptized publishers: 14:38-40

SUBJECT INDEX

223

Notes:

224

