L ASTING P EACE
AND H APPINESS
How to find them

Peace and Happiness
—Everyone’s Desire

W

HO does not want to be happy? Who does not want
to enjoy good health and long life? Who does not
wish to see peace and security? These are the normal desires of everyone. Sadly, though, reality often goes contrary
to our wishes. The world today is full of distress. Earth wide,
disasters, calamities, wars, diseases, crime, and injustices
are constantly on the increase. How can peace and happiness be found?
2 To those who claim to be practical and realistic, the way
to happiness is through wealth and riches. They feel that
money is the best safeguard; with it one can lead a comfortable life, with no more worries about food and shelter. True,
money can bring protection and bene?t in some ways. But
is wealth really the most important thing in life? Can money provide lasting protection? How reliable is material security? Business failures, economic depressions, crime, violence, wars, and disasters have ruined the fortunes of many
in an instant. Devastating experiences of this sort are too
numerous to recount.
3 Others pursue fame and position. They feel that if they
become prominent, they can tower over others and be admired by them. Yet, no matter how successful a person may
be, he must admit that circumstances can change quickly
and he can lose his position overnight. The satisfaction that
fame brings is only short-lived. And once a person’s life
comes to its end, the glory and the fame he enjoyed pass
away with him.
4 Many also feel that life is so short and human a?airs are
so changeable and unpredictable that they should just pursue life’s pleasures and have a good time while they still can.
Recreation and entertainment do have their place in life.
But can they provide lasting happiness and satisfaction?
When the excitement is over, how does a person feel? After
all the feasting and the merrymaking, those who indulge in

To enjoy happy family life is a
normal human desire

1-4. In what ways have people tried to ?nd peace and happiness?
With what results?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

3

Can money bring lasting
peace and happiness?

5 1996, 2009
Watch Tower
Bible and Tract Society
of Pennsylvania
All Rights Reserved
Publishers
Watchtower
Bible and Tract Society
of New York, Inc.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.

them are often left feeling empty and exhausted, and it all
adds up to a life devoid of meaning.
5 Wealth, fame, prominence, pleasures, revelry—none of
these can bring lasting happiness and contentment. Why
not? It is because those who seek happiness through these
means have aimed in the wrong direction and followed the
wrong path. They are concerned only with gratifying their
physical or material desires. When all is said and done, they
are left with the same spiritual void, longing, and frustration
that they started with. They have found no real contentment.
6 Birds and beasts are satisfied when their physical needs
—eating and sleeping—are met. Humans, however, have
needs far beyond these basic necessities. That is because animals are not endowed with a conscience, as we are. Wild
beasts do not have a capacity for spiritual things, whereas
humans do. Animals are not concerned with the purpose of
living, but humans yearn to know the meaning of life. To
live with real happiness, we must fulfill the needs of the
heart and the mind. The question we now face is, How can
such needs be satisfied?
7 For our life to be meaningful, we must first understand
why we are here. Throughout history, thinking people have
often wondered: ‘Where did man come from? What is the
purpose of life? Is there a Sovereign Lord of the universe?
If so, does he care about mankind? What is his purpose for
us?’ All of these are significant questions, but who can provide the satisfying and correct answers? Can religion do so?
Let us see.

2009 Printing

5-7. (a) Why do those who pursue fame, fortune, pleasure, and so
on, ultimately feel disappointed? (b) What questions must we consider if we want a meaningful life?

This publication is not for sale.
It is provided as part of a
worldwide Bible educational work
supported by voluntary donations.

Peace and Happiness—Everyone’s Desire ................ 3

Unless otherwise indicated,
Scripture quotations are
from the modern-language
New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures
—With References

Can Religion Satisfy Mankind’s Needs? ................... 5
Is There Really a Most High Creator? ...................... 9
A Guidebook for the Blessing of All Mankind .......... 13

Lasting Peace and Happiness
—How to Find Them
English (pc-E)

Cultivating Faith in the Creator ............................ 18

Made in the
United States of America

Pursue Lasting Peace and Happiness
With God’s People ............................................ 24

Photo Credit:
Page 6: U.S. Army Photo

www.jw.org

Lasting Peace and Happiness Just Ahead! .............. 29
L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

Can Religion Satisfy
Mankind’s Needs?

T

HE major religions in the world have vast numbers of
followers and many magni?cent churches, cathedrals,
synagogues, and temples. Despite all of this, have these religions taught the truth about God? Have they helped people to lead happier and more meaningful lives? Do their
leaders practice what they preach?
2 History clearly shows that the Western religions have
proved disappointing in these areas. For example, some
of the most horrible con?icts and massacres in history took place in lands professing to be Christian. The
Crusades, for example, were
launched by the churches
of Christendom from the
11th to the 13th century.
The wars during this period
took innocent lives by the
thousands.
3 In the early 19th century, the churches openly supported many Western powers in the expansion of their
empires in less-developed
lands and the wanton exploitation of the resources
of their colonial territories.
Church and State acted in
collusion. Hand in hand,
they brought distress and
misery to people in many
lands.
4 In the two world wars of

Religious wars have taken
innocent lives by the
thousands

1-6. What shameful record has
been left by the major religions
in the West?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

5

The clergy openly support the
wars of the nations

the 20th century, most of the belligerent powers on the opposing sides were Catholic or Protestant nations. Thus, with
the approval of their religious leaders, Catholics killed Catholics and Protestants killed Protestants. In more recent
times, the con?ict between Roman Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland resulted in heavy casualties. Leaders of these religions love to talk about peace and brotherhood, and all of them profess to serve the same God. But
in view of the facts, we must ask: Do they really have a genuine love for peace? Do they truly love their neighbors as
themselves?
5 Additionally, are the religious leaders and their ?ocks
known for their adherence to high moral standards? Has not
the media repeatedly exposed and reported on cases of
child molestation and other corrupt practices among the
clergy of Christendom? Some of the clergy openly support
homosexuality and premarital and extramarital sex. Others
with radical views advocate the violent overthrow of what
they consider to be unjust political or social systems, some
clerics even taking part in guerrilla warfare and riots.
6 As regards helping people to gain an accurate knowledge of God, all major religions of the West have failed miserably. Their doctrines are mainly based on traditional beliefs rather than on the teachings of the Bible. For example,
they believe that humans have an immortal soul and that
those who do not serve God will be tormented in a ?ery hell
forever. Just think! If God were really so cruel and hardhearted, would you want to worship him?—See box on
page 25.
7 Clearly, the religions of the West have not brought lasting peace and happiness for mankind, nor have they provided the right spiritual guidance. What, then, about the religions of the East? In China, for example, the three major
religions are Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism. Have
these religions brought lasting peace and happiness for the
Chinese?
8 In its early stages, Taoism was more a philosophy than
a religion. Its founder, Lao-tzu, was dissatis?ed with the
chaos and turmoil of the times and sought relief by shunning society and returning to nature. However, as time wore
on, Taoism became a system of worship venerating a pan7-10. What religious beliefs have the Chinese commonly accepted,
and to what have such beliefs led them?

6

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

theon of many gods and goddesses. Taoists practice divination. They attach great importance to omens and feng shui
(the reading of the forces of wind and water) as well as to
sundry other rituals. It is clear that Taoism falls short in providing satisfactory answers regarding the
meaning of life or in ful?lling the people’s
spiritual needs.
9 At the outset, Confucianism was
a school of ethics and
morality based on the
teachings of its founder, Confucius. Through
the centuries, Confucian
concepts have wielded a
strong hold on Chinese
culture and way of thinking. Still, being a philosophy of life, Confucianism
has neither helped the
Chinese to learn about
the Creator nor encouraged them to cultivate
a close relationship with
him. Although adopting its precepts as rules of conduct
brings certain bene?ts, Confucianism does not fully satisfy
one’s spiritual needs; nor has it brought lasting peace and
happiness.
10 Buddhism ?rst came into China from India. This religion advocates compassion and tolerance, and it has fascinated many by its complicated philosophy. But has Buddhism helped people to learn about the Sovereign of the
universe? Have the teachings of the Buddha satis?ed the
spiritual needs of mankind? The book Basics to Buddhism
says: “Buddhists do not believe in an all-powerful divine being in the universe”; “Everyone is capable of becoming a
Buddha”; “Everyone has to work on his own to become a
Buddha and be liberated from su?ering.” Buddhism has inspired, not faith in God, but reliance on self.
11 If a person’s faith is misplaced, how could he ever
?nd the truth that brings real satisfaction? Down through
the ages, the Chinese have followed the tradition of worshipping their ancestors, idols, and the spirits in nature,

Can religions based on myths
and superstitions really satisfy
people’s spiritual needs?

11. To be spiritually satis?ed, what questions must we consider?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

7

engrossed in the multitudes of rites and
rituals connected with them. As a result, the concept of a personal God, or
Creator, is something foreign to most
Chinese. Yet, as discussed earlier, to satisfy our spiritual needs,
we must come to know not only
who the Most High God is but
also what his purpose for mankind is. By so doing, we will be
able to act in harmony with that
purpose and gain lasting happiness. We therefore invite you to investigate and ?nd for yourself the
reasonable, objective, and satisfying answers to these questions: Is there a Creator? Does
he care about mankind? Can he really bring lasting
peace and happiness to mankind, who are so beset with
problems and di?culties?

Have Taoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism helped
people come to know the Creator?

8

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

Is There Really a
Most High Creator?

I

S THERE a God who is the Creator of all things? About this
question, there are many opinions. Some people reason
that since we cannot see God, how canwe believe in him? Others, seeing that there is so much su?ering on earth, wonder:
‘How could there really be a God who genuinely cares about
mankind? If he does exist, would he not have long ago
brought an end to all the su?ering?’ Is that how you feel?
2 The su?ering and calamities besetting mankind are
truly disheartening. Yet, the
earth is ?lled with life in abundant variety, all intricately
designed. How did all these
things come about if there
was no Creator? Those who
believe in evolution assert
that simple life-forms originated by chance; then they
gradually evolved into morecomplex living things. What,
though, is the likelihood of
life originating by accident?

Does not the beautiful earth
demonstrate that there is a
caring Creator?

Did Life Come About
by Chance?
3 The basic unit of living
things is the cell, and the basic
material that makes up a cell
is protein. Evolutionists acknowledge that the probability ofthe right atoms and molecules falling into place to form
just one simple protein molecule is about 1 in 10113, or 1 followed by 113 zeros. In other
1-5. (a) What is the probability of a simple protein molecule
coming into existence by chance?
(b) What is a basic fact that evolution cannot explain?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

9

The orderly universe requires
a Designer . . .

words, it could take 10113 chances for the event to occur once.
But any event that has one chance in 1050 is dismissed by
mathematicians as never happening.
4 However, far more than one simple protein molecule is
needed for life to occur. For a cell to maintain its functions,
some 2,000 di?erent proteins are needed. What, then, is the
probability of all of these happening at random? It is estimated that it is 1 in 1040,000, or 1 followed by 40,000 zeros! Are you
willing to rest your faith on such an outrageously remote
probability?
5 If the probability is so remote for a cell to come into existence by accident, it would be even more so for the cell to
evolve into the great variety of complicated living things. The
fact is that between humans and beasts, there are di?erences
far greater than the obvious physical ones. Man is endowed
with a conscience; he has feelings, aesthetic values, moral concepts, thinking ability, and reasoning powers. Animals do not
possess these capabilities. If man evolved from the animals,
why is there such a huge gulf between man and beast? This is
another thorny problem for the evolutionists.

Our Awesome Universe
Our awesome universe provides overwhelming evidence
for the existence of a Grand Creator. Some astronomers estimate that there are 100 billion galaxies in the universe and
that each galaxy may contain as many as 100 billion stars!
Some stars are many times the size of our sun. The galaxies
are not just haphazardly thrown together but are set out in an
organized and orderly manner.
7 The earth is a wonder among all the heavenly bodies in the
universe. It is, in fact, unique.
The earth provides just the
right environment to accommodate living things comfortably, like a magni?cent
and well-provisioned house.
It is avast storehouse that has
all of life’s necessities—food,
air, water, and light—and
much more. Surely, no intelligent person would ever be6

. . . much as a well-equipped
house requires a builder

6, 7. In what ways does the universe, especially the earth, display marvelous design?

10

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

lieve that a fully equipped and stocked house had no designer
butjust came about by chance. Would it not be even more unreasonable to think that the earth, equipped with everything
that is essential for life, just came about by chance?

The Marvelous Human Body
The marvelous structure of our human body also testi?es
to the existence of a Creator. A close look at a tiny living cell
will help us to understand why. Our body is made up of about
100 trillion (100,000,000,000,000) tiny cells. The complexity
ofeach living cell can be likened to that of a city with its many
operations, such as power generation, management, transportation, and defense. In addition, the cell’s nucleus contains
tens ofthousands of genes in the intricately arranged DNA. It
is said that our DNA contains enough information to ?ll an
encyclopedia of 1,000 volumes. All this information constitutes a genetic blueprint and determines our skin color, hair
type, stature, and countless other details of our body. If
all construction blueprints require meticulous design,
then who designed the complex genetic blueprint in
our body?
9 The structure and the function of the various
organs in our body are so intricate and ingenious
that no man-made machine can even remotely
compare with it. Ofall the organs in our body, not
one is more astounding than the human brain. The
New Encyclopædia Britannica notes: “Transmission
of information within the nervous system is more
complex than the largest telephone exchanges; problem solving by a human brain exceeds by far the capacity ofthe most powerful computers.” To scientists, the awesome function of our brain is cause for wonderment. Could
this marvelous organ have been formed simply by having the
correct atoms and molecules fall into place at random?
10 What conclusion can we draw from all of this? One thing
we can agree on is that laws must have a law-giver and that design requires a designer. Since precise order, complex design,
and immense wisdom are observed in everything—from the
smallest cell to the boundless universe—is it not reasonable
and logical to believe that there must be an all-intelligent and
all-powerful Designer behind them?
8

A single cell is
as complex as a city

8, 9. What does the intricate design of the human body reveal?
10-12. (a) Why is it not superstitious or unreasonable to believe in
the existence of God? (b) Based on the evidence presented, what is
your view on God’s existence?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

11

11

Wind-powered generators
prove the existence of wind
and electricity, though these
are invisible

The Bible is right when it says about God: “His invisible
qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward,
because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.” (Romans 1:20) Even though we cannot see God, our belief in his
existence is no mere superstition. Daily, we deal with many
things we cannot see, such as wind, electricity, magnetism,
and the force of gravity. We know that they exist because we
can observe the e?ects they produce. Similarly, the intricate
design and the superb order in the universe distinctly testify
to the existence of a Grand Creator.
12 God is invisible, so how can we come to know him as a
Person and establish a personal relationship with him? God
has made it possible for us to know him, primarily by two
means. Through his creation, God gives a clear indication of
his wisdom, power, and love. In addition, he has inspired men
to write a book, providing further information about himself.
That book is the Bible.

WHO IS GOD?

T

O THE Chinese, the concept of God, or Shangdi (literally “Emperor above”), is both foreign
and abstract. Most people worship heaven and
earth, spirits and demons, ancestors and other humans. Interestingly, however, according to
Chinese historical records, between three and
four thousand years ago, during the Xia and
Shang dynasties, the Chinese were already worshipping one supreme deity. The book The Religious History of China explains that they “reckoned that between heaven and earth there was a
principal God who stood supreme and had absolute control over all things. . . . This supreme deity
came to be called Di, or Shang-di, during the
Shang Dynasty, and was known as Tien [heaven],
or Tien-di [Emperor in Heaven], during the Zhou
Dynasty [11th century to 256 B.C.E.].” Thus, the
ancient Chinese believed in the existence of a Supreme Sovereign of the universe.
During the Spring and Autumn period (c. 722481 B.C.E.) and the Warring States period
(c. 480-221 B.C.E.), Confucianism and Taoism
gained ascendancy. In?uenced by these two
schools of thought, the worship of Shang-di was

12

gradually replaced by the abstract idea of reverence for Tien. By the Han dynasty (202 B.C.E.–
221 C.E.), under the dominance of Confucianism, the Chinese became engrossed in moral
culture and social order, and the concept of
Shang-di su?ered another setback. With the
spread of Buddhism into China, the Chinese no
longer held to the belief of a Creator who is in
control of the universe, but they accepted Heaven, or Providence, as the ?rst cause of all things.
Since then, the concept of God, or Shang-di, has
become something completely foreign to most
Chinese.
Who, then, really is God? The Bible shows that
God is not a force or law of nature that governs
the operation of all things in the universe. Nor is
he Tien, which is venerated by many Chinese.
Rather, God is a living spirit who has feelings and
personality traits. He is the almighty and omniscient Sovereign of the Universe, and his love is
boundless. Not only has he created all things but
he also has a de?nite purpose for mankind—that
we worship him with love and live forever on this
beautiful earth in lasting peace and happiness.

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

A Guidebook for the
Blessing of All Mankind

N

OTWITHSTANDING the opinion of many, the Bible is
a most extraordinary book. The New Encyclopædia Britannica calls it “probably the most in?uential collection of books
in human history.” This is certainly not an overstatement. Let
us see why the Bible is so outstanding.

From Antiquity—Yet, Most Widely Distributed
The Bible is one of the oldest of the books that have survived till our time, especially among religious texts. Its earliest part was written in ancient Hebrew some 3,500 years
ago (which corresponds to the Shang dynasty in China)
by an Israelite named Moses. It began with the book of
Genesis, an account ofthe stages ofcreation and the beginning of the human family. In the following 1,600
years, about 40 di?erent people took part in completing this collection, or library, of 66 books containing laws, prophecies, history, poetry, letters, counsel, and much more.
3 Even though the Bible is old and has been the
target of much vicious opposition and hatred,
it has turned out to be the most widely distributed book in history. The Bible has now been
translated into some 2,500 languages, and about
three billion copies, in its entirety or in part, have
already been distributed! It is said that 98 percent
of the people on earth have access to the Bible in their
own language. Just think: If God intends to communicate
with mankind by means of a book, is it not reasonable that
this book should be well-known and easily available so that
people of all nationalities and races could read and bene?t
from it? (1 Timothy 2:4) The Bible is just such a book.
2

4

Reliable Contents
If the Bible is really from God, its contents must be

1-3. What kind of book is the Bible, and what attention has been
given to it?
4-8. How has the Bible withstood scrutiny in the light of science and
history?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

13

DATES OF PRINCIPAL
RELIGIOUS WRITINGS
Religious
Writings

Approximate Year
of Completion

Pentateuch (Bible)

1473 B.C.E.

Veda (Hinduism)

900 B.C.E.

Tao Te Ching (Taoism) 510 B.C.E.
The Analects
(Confucianism)

480 B.C.E.

Hebrew Scriptures
completed (Bible)

443 B.C.E.

Three Baskets
(Buddhism)

1st century B.C.E.

Whole Bible completed

98 C.E.

Koran (Islam)

650 C.E.

Kojiki and Nihon
shoki (Shinto)

720 C.E.

The Bible reaches further back into
man’s history than any other ancient religious writings

14

completely accurate and reliable. Can that be said of the Bible? Can it withstand scrutiny in the light of science and history?
5 Although the Bible is not a science textbook, whenever it
touches on scienti?c matters, it is in harmony with proven
science and is free from the mistaken views and absurd theories prevalent at the time of its writing. For instance, in ancient times some believed that the earth was supported by
four elephants standing on a big sea turtle. Yet, the Bible simply states: “[God] is stretching out the north over the empty
place, hanging the earth upon nothing.” (Job 26:7, written
about 1473 B.C.E.) As early as 2,700 years ago, the Bible correctly noted the shape of the earth, saying: “There is One who
is dwelling above the circle (“globe,” Douay Version) of the
earth.” (Isaiah 40:22) If the Bible had not been inspired by
God, how could its writers have known such facts?
6 Of the facts stated in the Bible, some have only come to be
known and con?rmed by science in recent times. For example, the Bible long ago revealed a beginning for the universe
(Genesis 1:1), the correct order in which all living things were
formed (Genesis, chapter 1), and the e?ects of the hereditary
process (Psalm 139:16). Long before people had any concept
of germs and hygiene, the Bible provided the Israelites with
instructions that anyone touching a dead body (or excrement) became unclean and had to wash himself and his garments.—Numbers 19:11-22; Deuteronomy 23:12-14.
7 How did the Bible writers come to know these scienti?cally correct practices? They could not have written according
to their own ideas because people in Bible times did not possess such knowledge. Only the Creator had the power andwisdom to provide that information. We, therefore, have sound
reasons to believe that the Bible is truly from God.
8 What about history? Most ancient historical writings are
riddled with legends and myths and tend to magnify successes and victories of a ruler or a people while glossing over their
failures and defeats. The Bible di?ers entirely in this respect;
its records are completely accurate and honest, providing speci?c names, places, dates, and times that can be veri?ed. For
example, regarding the time when Jesus commenced his ministry, the Bible account provides the names of seven contemporaneous rulers and leaders, so that the reader can ascertain
the exact time by comparing the Bible recordwith reliable history. (Luke 3:1, 2) If a book was written under the direction
L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

of God, it must be completely accurate and truthful, as is the
case with the Bible.

Accurate Prophecies
Humans cannot foretell the future with any certainty. If
a book consistently provides prophecies that are accurately
ful?lled, it could not be produced by human ability and wisdom. The Bible contains hundreds of prophecies, many of
which have already been ful?lled. For example, centuries in
advance the Bible foretold the fall of Babylon, the order in
which succeeding world empires would appear, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the exiling of the Jews to Babylon.
—Isaiah 13:17-19; 44:26; Jeremiah 25:8-12; Daniel 8:5-8, 20-22.
10 Bible prophecies concerning Jesus Christ are especially
remarkable. Jesus lived in the ?rst century. Hundreds ofyears
before his birth, numerous prophecies concerning him had
been given and were preserved in the Hebrew Scriptures
(commonly called the Old Testament). All these prophecies
were ful?lled in the one man Jesus, many in ways completely
beyond his control. He could not, for instance, have arranged
the time and place of his birth, the tribe into which he would
be born, or the manner of his betrayal, humiliation, torture,
execution, death, and burial. (Micah 5:2; Daniel 9:25; Genesis 49:10; Zechariah 11:12; Isaiah 50:6; Psalm 22:7, 8; 34:20)
The ful?llment of these and other prophecies proves that Jesus was the Savior sent by God.
11 Bible prophecies do not deal only with the ancient past.
They also accurately foretell events that are taking place in
our day. For example, just review Matthew chapter 24, Luke
chapter 21, 2 Timothy 3:1-5, and Revelation 6:3-8, and you will
9

From birth to
death, Jesus
ful?lled numerous
prophecies
recorded in the
Hebrew Scriptures

9-12. (a) What are some prophecies found in the Bible? (b) What
does the ful?llment of Bible prophecies prove?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

15

Some 2,000 years ago, the
Bible foretold events taking
place in our day

see how precisely the Bible describes modern-day happenings. It is worth noting that after the ?rst world war, when the
League of Nations was established, world leaders asserted
that man had learned a bitter lesson and that there would never be another world war. The Bible, on the other hand, reveals
that the untold su?ering caused by the ?rst world war was
only the “beginning ofpangs ofdistress.” (Matthew 24:8) History proves that Bible prophecy is completely accurate and
that man’s thinking is erroneous.
12 Since prophecies in the Bible were ful?lled so accurately,
is this not overwhelming evidence that the Bible is really God’s
Word? Only the almighty God can provide such accurate information about events long before they occur.—2 Peter 1:21.

Practical Wisdom
Life in today’s sel?sh world is ?lled with problems. Many
people are plagued by money problems. Families are shattered by serious marriage problems. Young people are confronted with questions about friends, sex, drinking, drugs,
and so on. If the Bible is really a guide from God for all mankind, it should help people to deal with these problems. But
does it?
14 Bible counsel, though often di?erent from popular opinion, is nonetheless e?ective and practical. For example, when
marriage problems arise, marriage counselors often suggest
separation or divorce as the solution. The Bible, however,
points out that the marriage arrangement is a serious matter.
It also advises both husbands and wives to show love and deep
respect for each other and thus prevent serious problems
from developing. (Ephesians 5:22-28) As for money matters,
the Bible reminds us to avoid greed and cultivate contentment. It also encourages us to desist from money-wasting bad
habits, such as overdrinking, smoking, drug abuse, and gambling. (1 Timothy 6:7-10) In human relations, the Bible’s advice is: “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you,
you also must likewise do to them.” (Matthew 7:12) If you
show love in all you do, you will gain the friendship and respect of others, thus lessening pressure and friction.
15 From these few examples, do you not agree that counsel
from the Bible is practical and is also superior to human wisdom? Actually, there are millions of people around the world
today who have overcome their problems by diligently follow13

13-15. How do the counsel and advice that the Bible o?ers on daily
living re?ect superior and practical wisdom?

16

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

ing the Bible’s advice. Yes, by applying the Bible’s practical
counsel, it is possible to ?nd lasting peace and happiness.

A Guide for the Blessing of All Mankind
16 Many Orientals contend that the Bible is a product of the
West, that its teachings and advice are not necessarily suitable
for people living in the East. Is this true? Since the Creator
understands human needs better than anyone else does, he
has provided the Bible for mankind as a whole so that all people can bene?t from its teachings. For instance, Chinese
teachers and sages through the ages have provided many ethical aphorisms and sayings, some of which no doubt are of
practical value. However, many of these sayings merely echo
what the Bible teaches. Here are just a few examples:
Respect your seniors: Before gray hair you should rise up
(Leviticus 19:32)
Honor your parents: Honor your father and your mother
(Exodus 20:12)
When you drink water, think of its source: Remember, now,
your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood (Ecclesiastes 12:1)
He who comes near vermilion is stained red, and he who comes
near ink is stained black: He that is walking with wise persons
will become wise, but he that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly (Proverbs 13:20)
17 It should be noted that such Bible teachings were written
long before the many schools of thought in China came into
existence. Indeed, the Bible can be of immense bene?t to all
mankind. With the help of the Bible, we can ?nd the true purpose and meaning of life. Just as our daily bread satis?es us
physically, the Bible can satisfy us spiritually. (Matthew 5:3;
John 4:34) The Bible can also help us draw close to God. The
closer we come to our Creator, the happier and more satis?ed
we will be.
18 Bene?ts promised in the Bible, however, are not limited
to life today. The Bible reveals that God will soon bring an
end to all wickedness and injustice, by means of a righteous
government of his making. The earthwill then become a global paradise. What requirements, though, must you meet so
that you can enjoy such marvelous blessings? Please read the
next chapter.

Following Bible counsel can
improve our life

16-18. (a) Are the Bible’s instructions practical for the Chinese?
(b) Do you now believe that the Bible is a book bene?cial for all
mankind? Please explain.

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

17

Cultivating Faith
in the Creator

B

Y OBSERVING the marvels of creation and reasoning from experience, many people have concluded that
there is a Creator. But just believing that there is a Creator would not necessarily do them much good. Many today will readily say that they believe in the existence of
God. For example, generations of Chinese, in?uenced by
Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist thinking, more or less believe in Providence, or Heaven, and its retribution. But
they feel that comprehending this is beyond human ability. In the West, there are
the agnostics who, though
not denying the possibility
of God’s existence, feel that
no human can get to know
him. Obviously, such ways
of thinking would not help
one to develop true faith in
the Creator.
2 Thus, in addition to believing that there is a God,
we must trust and have faith
in him. The Bible points
out: “Without faith it is impossible to please him well,
for he that approaches God
must believe that he is and
that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” (Hebrews 11:6)
Believing that God is “the
rewarder of those earnestly seeking him” means that
God is not aloof and uncaring. Rather, as a caring God,
1-3. Why do we need to know
the Creator?

18

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

he helps those earnestly seeking him to come to know him,
and he rewards them.
3 As an old Chinese saying puts it, Among a hundred virtues, ?lial piety is the foremost. Surely it is proper that children know their father and honor their parents. (Ephesians
6:1-3; Colossians 3:20) Do we not have all the more reason to
know our Creator and his will? (Ecclesiastes 12:13) That being so, in order to know the true God and have faith in him,
we need to ?nd satisfactory answers to these vital questions:
What is God’s name? Why did he create us? What is the purpose of life? What is our ultimate destiny? Why is there so
much su?ering in the world? We cannot answer these questions simply by logic or by our own experience or reasoning.
We need enlightenment and direction from the Creator himself, and he has provided these in his Word, the Bible.
—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
4 The Bible tells us that God’s name is Jehovah. It also reveals his purposes, views, and feelings, as well as his dealings
with humans so that we can come to know him accurately.
Right from the start, the Bible shows clearly what God’s purpose was in creating humans. In its ?rst book, Genesis, the
Bible relates: “God proceeded to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them. Further, God blessed them and God said to them:
‘Be fruitful and become many and ?ll the earth and subdue
it.’ ” (Genesis 1:27, 28) God placed the ?rst human pair he
created, Adam and Eve, in a peaceful and happy garden,
called the garden of Eden. They enjoyed ideal living conditions and meaningful work. As time passed, they were to
bring forth perfect children. Not only would they not grow
old and die but they would enjoy the company of their o?spring, and together they would subdue the earth and turn it
into a paradise in which a perfect human race could enjoy
forever all the blessings that God provides. That, in brief, was
God’s original purpose regarding mankind and the earth.
(Isaiah 45:18) Does not all of this show that Jehovah is a loving, merciful, kind, and generous God? Is it not most satisfying and happifying to worship and to have faith in such a
God?—Psalm 36:9; 103:13; Revelation 4:11.
5 The Bible goes on to tell us, however, that for lack of

Lacking appreciation, Adam
and Eve lost their right to
everlasting life

4. (a) Who is God? (b) What is God’s purpose for mankind and the
earth?
5-7. (a) How did mankind lose out on God’s original purpose?
(b) What loving provisions did God make for distressed mankind?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

19

Study the Bible with
an open mind

20

appreciation and obedience, Adam and Eve broke God’s
clearly stated command and thereby lost the right to live forever in the Paradise garden. (Genesis 3:1-19) Not only that,
but their transgression also brought sad consequences for
their yet unborn o?spring. The Bible says: “Through one
man sin entered into the
world and death through
sin, and thus death spread
to all men because they
had all sinned.” (Romans 5:
12) The hardships and dif?culties that we see today
are the results of sin and
imperfection. Even so, the
merciful God made provisions through the ransom
sacri?ce of his Son, Jesus
Christ, to deliver mankind
out of slavery to sin and
death. (John 3:16; 1 John 4:
9, 10) What provisions?
6 For the blessing of all
mankind, God purposed
to set up a Kingdom, or
government, in heaven and
appointed his Son, Jesus
Christ, as the King of that
Kingdom. (Matthew 6:10) By means of this Kingdom, God
will eliminate all the problems on earth and carry out his
original purpose, turning the earth into a paradise home for
mankind. (Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:3, 4) It is not a fantasy
to think of living in an earthly paradise under the rule of
God’s Kingdom, enjoying perfect health and happiness forever. Jehovah God has given this personal guarantee: “So my
word that goes forth from my mouth will prove to be. It will
not return to me without results, but it will certainly do that
in which I have delighted, and it will have certain success in
that for which I have sent it.” (Isaiah 55:11) What love God
has demonstrated in all of this! Should we not be grateful to
him? Gratitude has impelled millions of people around the
world, from di?erent races and cultures, to take action to cultivate a relationship with God and to serve him.
7 How, then, can true faith be cultivated? To those who profess no religion, faith in God is just a psychological crutch
L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

that provides comfort for the mind and solace for the heart.
Do you agree with that view? What really is faith?

The Way to Cultivate Faith
“Faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for, the
evident demonstration of realities though not beheld.” (Hebrews 11:1) As can be seen from this de?nition given in the
Bible, faith is based on accurate knowledge and facts; otherwise, there would be no di?erence between faith and blind
superstition. Therefore, to cultivate faith in God, three steps
are essential: (1) Study the Bible diligently, (2) ponder over
its teachings and admonitions, and (3) apply in your daily life
what you learn.
9 Since faith is based on accurate knowledge, it is logical
that to have faith in God, one must study God’s Word, the
Bible. In this regard the Beroeans of the ?rst century are
good examples for us. Though steeped in both Jewish and
Greek religious traditions, some of them were open-minded
and readily gave ear to the apostle Paul’s message. They “received the word with the greatest eagerness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily,” and many of them “became believers.” (Acts 17:11, 12) To acquire an accurate
knowledge of God and his Word, we too need to be openminded and carefully examine the teachings of God’s Word
and take them to heart.—John 17:3; 2 Timothy 3:15-17.
10 It is true that we have to work for a living, but laboring
only to satisfy our physical and material needs will not bring
us real happiness. Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious of
their spiritual need.” (Matthew 5:3) If we allow our busy routine to sti?e our spiritual needs, we are putting the cart before the horse and are shortsighted indeed. So we need to do
our best to ?nd time in our busy lives to study the Bible regularly. God’s Word exhorts: “Keep strict watch that how you
walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked.”
(Ephesians 5:15, 16) Take this advice, and arrange a practical
schedule so that you can keep your activities in proper balance. Jehovah God will sustain those who are earnestly seeking him.—Matthew 7:7.
11 To cultivate genuine faith in God, the next step is to meditate on what you have learned. Actually, to appreciate the
8

Carefully ponder over the
things learned

8-13. (a) What is faith? (b) What steps must we take to develop faith
in God? Why?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

21

We learn to drive by
practicing what we have
learned under the guidance
of an instructor; we cultivate
faith in God in a similar
manner

22

value of what you have read, meditation is indispensable,
even more important than repeated reading. Only by doing this can you grasp, digest, and assimilate the information, and then the seeds of truth will become deeply
embedded and take root in your heart. Therefore, compare the things you are learning from the Bible with your
own views, think objectively and reasonably, and weigh
them against one another. On the other hand, do not allow
personal prejudices or certain deep-rooted opinions to
deprive you of a fair opportunity to determine what is
the truth and worthy of your
belief. Proceeding this way,
you will not only realize that
God is a real individual but
also be impelled to establish a personal relationship
with him.
12 The third step in cultivating faith is to put into practice what God tells us to do.
We must remember that a living faith is supported by actions. (James 2:17, 26) If a man wants to have enough faith
or con?dence in his ability to drive a car, he cannot just read
an instruction manual or even go over the procedure in his
mind and then drive o? in a car, can he? No. He needs to
have someone help him to put into practice step-by-step the
things he learned from the manual. In this way, after several driving lessons, he will develop enough con?dence to start
driving and can become a quali?ed driver. It is the same with
cultivating faith in God. Besides studying and meditating,
you must put into practice, as soon as possible, the things you
learn from the Bible. For example, since you have learned
that God is an invisible spirit, do you appreciate that you cannot worship him through any idols or images? You have also
learned that Jehovah is a loving heavenly Father. Then, are
you willing to express your feelings for him in prayer to him?
13 When you are willing to apply what you have learned
from the Bible, you are demonstrating to God that you believe in him and his Word, the Bible. Your faith will accordingly grow stronger. However, only by practicing what you
are learning will you be convinced that what the Bible says
is not empty theory but is ofgreat practical value. The Bible’s
L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

advice is: “Taste and see that Jehovah is good, O you people;
happy is the able-bodied man that takes refuge in him.”
(Psalm 34:8) Yes, applying Bible principles in our lives is an
indispensable ingredient in cultivating faith in God and ?nding lasting peace and happiness.

A Vital Factor
Although you have now seen enough evidence to show
that there is a Creator, that the Bible is his Word, and that it
is his desire for you to establish a personal relationship with
him, there is yet another vital factor that will determine
whether you will bene?t from all of this. What is that factor?
It is your own heart condition.
15 A good heart condition is essential for the truth of God’s
Word to strike a responsive chord. If a person is obstinately
unwilling to believe, he will remain unconvinced no matter
how overwhelming the evidence may be. Well has it been said
that to cultivate genuine faith in God, we need to be honest,
humble, and spiritually hungry. The hypocritical and sel?sh
religious leaders in Jesus’ day hardened their hearts so much
that they were unable to exercise faith in Jesus. However,
many among the lowly, common people readily gave ear to
Jesus’ teachings. The situation is no di?erent today.—Luke
21:37, 38; John 8:43-47.
16 Why is an honest, humble, and teachable attitude so essential? It is because if a person is obsessed with his racial,
cultural, or religious upbringing, it will greatly hinder him
from taking in accurate knowledge of the Bible. In everyday
life, if we are humble, open-minded, and willing to learn new
things, we will certainly enhance the quality of our work and
improve the condition of our life. So then, why not adopt the
same open-minded attitude when it comes to religion and
humbly study God’s Word and apply its healthful teachings?
17 Today, there is a great crowd worldwide consisting of
people from di?erent races, language groups, and cultural
backgrounds doing just that. They have to cope with the
problems of life just as you do, but they deeply appreciate
that the best way to ?nd peace and happiness is to take in
knowledge of the Creator and exercise faith in him. They
make up God’s organization on earth today. Who are these
people?
14

Expressing your feelings to
God in prayer will draw you
closer to him

14-17. (a) What are some things that may prevent people from accepting the truth about God? (b) What proper heart attitude should
we cultivate?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

23

Pursue Lasting Peace
and Happiness
With God’s People

T

The Israelites were once
chosen by God to be his
earthly representatives

HROUGHOUT history, the Creator has provided the
necessary means by which those earnestly seeking him
can come and worship him. In other words, Jehovah has always had loyal worshippers on earth serving as his channel of
communication as well as being his representatives.
2 From the 16th century B.C.E., and for about 1,500 years,
the Israelites were God’s chosen people, his representatives
on earth. (Exodus 19:5, 6) Jehovah organized them into a
nation, gave them his laws, and provided them with detailed information concerning
pure worship. Later, God even
appointed a king to rule over
them. However, because of being repeatedly unfaithful, the
Israelites were cast o? by God
in the ?rst century C.E. (Matthew 23:37, 38) When Jesus
came to earth, he clearly pointed out the way to God, saying:
“I am the way and the truth
and the life. No one comes to
the Father except through me.”
(John 14:6) Followers of Jesus
Christ were accepted by God
to replace the nation of Israel as God’s representatives on
earth.—1 Peter 2:9, 10.
3 The Christians in the ?rst
century were a united brotherhood, fully devoted to the evan1, 2. (a) How were the ancient Israelites organized to serve as God’s
earthly representatives? (b) Why
was the nation of Israel rejected by
God, and by whom was it replaced?
3. What characterized the early
Christians?

24

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

gelizing work. (Matthew 28:
19, 20) They held fast to the
teachings of the Bible. They
were known for being lawabiding, respectful of government o?cials, and loving
toward their fellow man. Despite all of this, they were
viciously opposed and persecuted. Why? Because they
firmly believed that only
God’s Kingdom can bring
lasting peace and happiness
for mankind. In obedience to Jesus’ command, they gave full
support to God’s Kingdom, remaining strictly neutral in
worldly a?airs, not taking part in or interfering with any political or military activities. (Matthew 6:33; John 18:36) Their
position was often misunderstood, and this brought upon
them opposition and persecution. Still, they preached about

These
publications
help people to
learn the truth
about God

CAN THE DEAD INFLUENCE THE LIVING?

M

ANY people have a morbid fear of the
dead. Some believe that spirits of the dead
can either protect them as their guardians or
harm them as vengeful ghosts. Many Chinese
worship their ancestors as a way of showing ?lial
piety (devotion to parents) and of ensuring blessings for future generations. Though such beliefs
are common, the Bible clearly shows that the
dead cannot in any way in?uence the living.
In the Bible, there is no mention of a soul that
lives on after a person dies. Even though some
Bible translations contain references to an immortal soul, they are, in fact, incorrect renderings of
the original text.1 In fact, the Bible says: “His
spirit goes out, he goes back to his ground.”
(Psalm 146:4) At death, the brain stops working,
all senses cease to function, and memory disappears. How, then, can the dead possibly know
whom to help or harm? Clearly, the dead can do
nothing!
1 For more information regarding what happens when a person
dies, see What Does the Bible Really Teach? pages 208-211, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Furthermore, the Bible states: “The living are
conscious that they will die; but as for the dead,
they are conscious of nothing at all . . . Also, their
love and their hate and their jealousy have already perished.” (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 6) In other
words, when a person dies, he simply ceases to
exist as a living being. He can no longer su?er,
nor can he bene?t from any rites and rituals, the
burning of candles, incense, and fake money
and the o?ering of meats and fruits. The Bible’s
teaching regarding the condition of the dead
gives us great comfort and relief, does it not?
The hope for the dead lies in the resurrection.
God promised that through his Son, Jesus, the
dead would be brought back to life.—John 11:
25; Acts 24:15.
The Bible does show that there are wicked
spirit creatures who want to harm us. (Matthew
4:24; Acts 16:16) These wicked spirits, however, are not our dead ancestors; they are rebellious angels who oppose God and bring great
calamities to the human race. They are demons.
—2 Peter 2:4; Jude 6.

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

25

the Kingdom with unwavering zeal. As Paul wrote in his letter to the Christians in Colossae, “[the good news] has presented itself to you, even as it is bearing fruit and increasing
in all the world.” The ?rst-century Christians preached the
good news throughout the realms of the Roman Empire.
—Colossians 1:6.

A Period of Darkness—The Rise of Christendom
In time, the Christian congregation faced a period of dramatic changes. As foretold in the Bible, false Christians in?ltrated God’s organization and became a lawless in?uence,
bringing in teachings and practices that were unscriptural.
—Matthew 13:24-30, 36-43; Acts 20:29, 30; 2 Thessalonians 2:
6-8; 1 Timothy 4:1-3; 2 Timothy 2:16-18; 2 Peter 2:1-3.
5 In the ?rst-century Christian congregation, there were no
class distinctions. By the second century, a hierarchy of
bishops and presbyters had come into existence, resulting in a separation of clergy and laity. Next, such pagan
doctrines as the Trinity, the immortality of the soul, and
hell?re came to be accepted by those who claimed to be
Christians. Then, in 313 C.E., Roman Emperor Constantine ordered that this apostate form of Christianity be recognized as a lawful religion.
By the end of the fourth century, the “Christian” Church,
which was actively meddling
in politics, was promoted to be
the o?cial religion of the Roman Empire, and it became
known as the Roman Catholic
Church.
6 In the 16th century, the
Reformation brought new developments to the religious
scene in Europe. Reformers,
such as Martin Luther, Ulrich
Zwingli, and John Calvin, at4

Jehovah’s Witnesses
demonstrate genuine
Christian love

4, 5. How did the Roman Catholic
Church come into existence, and
how does it compare with the early Christian congregation?
6, 7. How did the Protestant
churches come to be, and why do
they not represent a return to true
Christianity?

26

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

tacked the Catholic Church on various issues. As a result, religious groups sprang up, breaking free from the papal authority of Rome. Later these groups became known as Protestants (protesters against the Roman Catholic Church).
7 Even though the various Protestant churches are organized di?erently, they have basically retained the separation
of clergy and laity. They also continue to teach such unscriptural doctrines as the Trinity, the immortality ofthe soul, eternal torment in a ?ery hell, and others. On the matter of Christian neutrality, Protestants do not di?er from Catholics. They
remain a part of the world. While the Protestant Reformation
did bring about some changes, it did not mark a return to true
Christianity. However, in a parable, Jesus Christ foretold that
the time would come when true Christianity would be restored and wheatlike true Christians would “shine as brightly
as the sun.”—Matthew 13:24-30, 36-43.

God’s True Worshippers in Modern Times
In the late 19th century, a group of sincere Bible students
in Pennsylvania, U.S.A., began to discern that many of the
doctrines taught by the churches are unscriptural. They decided to undertake a systematic study of the Bible to see what
it really teaches. Soon, they began to make known the Bible truths that they learned by publishing and distributing
books, magazines, and tracts. Over the past 100 years and
more, this group, now known as Jehovah’s Witnesses, has
grown from a mere handful to a vast company of over seven
million in more than 235 lands around the world.
9 Jesus told his followers: “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another . . . By this all will know
that you are my disciples, ifyou have love among yourselves.”
(John 13:34, 35) For this reason, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not
get involved in wars or social con?icts. Even under the most
trying circumstances, they are determined to remain ?rm in
their stand and love one another to the end. For example, during the second world war, they made great sacri?ces in order
to hold fast to Jesus’ command. Commenting on the situation in Nazi Germany, historian Claudia Koonz said in her
book Mothers in the Fatherland: “From the ?rst, Jehovah’s
Witnesses did not cooperate with any facet of the Nazi state.
. . . About half (mostly men) of all Jehovah’s Witnesses were
8

8. How has true Christianity been restored in modern times?
9, 10. What proves that Jehovah’s Witnesses truly represent God
and make up his organization in modern times?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

sent to concentration camps, a thousand of them were executed, and another thousand died between 1933 and 1945.”
They were willing to sacri?ce their lives because of their love
for God and for their fellow man. This helps to identify them
as true Christians.
10 Like the early Christians, Jehovah’s Witnesses are lawabiding citizens. They take to heart Jesus’ words: “Pay back,
therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to
God.” (Matthew 22:21) They obey “Caesar,” or the governmental authorities, by diligently ful?lling the responsibilities that are required of citizens, such as paying taxes
and complying with census laws and marriage registrations.
However, when there is a con?ict between Caesar’s law and
God’s requirements, they follow the example of the ?rstcentury Christians, who said: “We must obey God as ruler
rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) Truly, in these and all aspects
of their life and their worship, Jehovah’s Witnesses make up
God’s true worshippers in modern times.

Turn to True Worship Now
“God is not partial,” the Bible tells us, “but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Yes, it is God’s will that
people of all nations come to know him and be blessed by
him. To this end, Jehovah’s Witnesses publish Bible literature in well over 400 languages. They use every available
means to bring the good news of the Bible to people around
the earth. (Matthew 24:14) And they o?er to study the Bible
free of charge with all who are interested. Jehovah’s Witnesses sincerely invite you to share with them in the pursuit of
lasting peace and happiness. Would you be willing to do so?
12 Over the past two thousand years, many religious institutions and organizations have misrepresented true Christianity and have slandered the name of God and of Christ.
The time for God to take action to execute judgment against
all false religion is at hand! Inview ofthat, Jehovah’s Witnesses urge all who truly love God to heed the command found at
Revelation 18:4 and get out ofall false religions. True worship
has been restored, and millions of people around the world
are streaming to it. (Isaiah 2:2-4) Are you one of them? If so,
you can look forward to wonderful blessings just ahead.
11

11. What are Jehovah’s Witnesses doing to help people of all nations
turn to God?
12. Why is it urgent that you make the right choice in your worship
today?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

Lasting Peace and
Happiness Just Ahead!

J

ESUS taught his disciples to pray: “Our Father in the
heavens, let your name be sancti?ed. Let your kingdom
come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon
earth.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) We are to pray for God’s Kingdom
to come. But what is God’s Kingdom? It is a heavenly government. Jehovah has appointed his beloved Son, Jesus
Christ, to be its King. What will this Kingdom do for us?
2 More than 2,500 years ago, God inspired his prophet
Daniel to say: “In the days of those kings [the nations on
earth] the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will
never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not
be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an
end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times
inde?nite.” (Daniel 2:44) This prophecy clearly points out
that God’s Kingdom must ?rst remove human rulership,
which is causing all the divisions and su?erings on earth today, and then it will bring in a lasting, peaceful rule over all
mankind. When will all of this take place? Will we see it?
3 When Jesus was on earth, his disciples asked him: “Tell
us, When will these things be, and what will be the sign
of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of
things?” Jesus’ reply indicated that there would be global
wars, food shortages, great earthquakes, and increasing lawlessness. Besides, false religious teachers would arise to mislead many, his true disciples would become objects of persecution and hatred, the love of the greater number would
cool o?, and the good news of God’s Kingdom would be
preached in all the earth. (Matthew 24:3-14) Have you seen
such things occurring? Many observers have admitted that
since the ?rst world war broke out in 1914, mankind has entered a time of unprecedented turmoil. Philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote: “Ever since 1914, everybody conscious
of trends in the world has been deeply troubled by what has

1, 2. What is God’s Kingdom?
3-5. Why do we ?rmly believe that God’s Kingdom will soon solve
all the problems of the world?

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

29

All of us are faced
with a life-and-death
choice
Only sheeplike ones
will survive the end of
this wicked system
of things

seemed like a fated and predetermined march toward ever
greater disaster.” Danish historian Peter Munch is reported as writing: “The outbreak of the war in 1914 is the great
turning point of the history of humanity. . . . We entered an
age of disaster, horror, and hatred, with insecurity everywhere.”
4 Besides wars, from 1914 onward, famine, pestilence,
earthquakes, and violence have escalated to an unprecedented degree worldwide. Sadly, in spite of advanced
science and technology, mankind is totally helpless when it
comes to solving these di?cult problems. All of this proves
beyond any doubt that since 1914, the sign Jesus gave regarding the time of the end is right before our eyes. Jesus
Christ has begun ruling in the invisible heavens. The world
has entered its time of the end!
5 As all these events are taking place in our very time, all
of us are faced with a life-and-death choice. What is that
choice? In talking about the end of this system of things, Jesus indicated that he will divide the people of all the nations, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats. Only
sheeplike ones—people who love righteousness and actively support God’s Kingdom—will survive the end of this
wicked system of things and enjoy God’s blessings under his
Kingdom forever.—Matthew 25:31, 33.
6 What blessings will God’s Kingdom bring for mankind?
The things that the Kingdom will soon accomplish include:
(1) Wars, crime, and violence will be eliminated forever.
—Psalm 46:8, 9; Isaiah 2:4.
(2) Equality and impartiality will exist for all; there will
be no more racial, social, or other forms of discrimination.
—Acts 10:35; Revelation 7:9, 10.
(3) There will be abundant food, adequate housing, and
enjoyable work for everyone.—Psalm 72:16; Isaiah 25:6; 65:
21, 22.
(4) Sickness, disability, old age, and death will be no
more.—Isaiah 25:8; 35:5, 6; Revelation 21:4.
(5) The dead will be raised.—John 5:28, 29; Revelation
20:12.
(6) The earth will become a global paradise.—Luke 23:
43; Psalm 98:7-9.
6, 7. (a) What blessings will God’s Kingdom bring? (b) What are
you now being sincerely invited to do?

30

L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

7

“This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of
you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth,
Jesus Christ,” said Jesus. (John 17:3) We therefore sincerely
invite you to make the time to study the Bible and ?nd out
what you need to do in order to qualify for the hope of enjoying life forever in Paradise on earth under God’s Kingdom. We encourage you to associate regularly with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Earth wide, there are millions with living
faith who are worshipping the Eternal Sovereign, Jehovah,
in one accord. Now is the time for you to join their ranks.
Now is the time to take action without delay. Do not hesitate. Join them in accepting the invitation: “Come! . . . Let
anyone that wishes take life’s water free.”—Revelation 22:17.
L AS T I N G P E AC E A N D H A P P I N E S S — H OW TO F I N D T H E M

Will you make the e?ort to
?nd lasting peace
and happiness?

31

Jehovah God is now opening to you the opportunity
to live in a paradise! The time is coming when you will
be able to enjoy life in lasting peace and happiness.
Our loving and almighty heavenly Father, Jehovah,
will make this come true without fail, for he promises:
“So my word that goes forth from my mouth will
prove to be. It will not return to me without results,
but it will certainly do that in which I have delighted.”
—Isaiah 55:10, 11.

pc-E

