The

Pathway
to

Peace and
Happiness

The

Pathway
to

Peace and
Happiness
Table of Contents
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

3

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

5

A Book That Is Extraordinary

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

8

Promises That We Can Trust

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

11

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

14

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

17

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

21

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

24

We All Need Guidance and Direction
The Search for Practical Guidance

Getting to Know the Originator of All Things
A God of Love and Justice

A God Full of Wisdom and Great in Power
An End to All Problems

Peace and Happiness Soon! 9
To Find Out More

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

27

9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

31

5 2010
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
All Rights Reserved
Publishers
WATCHTOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, INC.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
2010 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational
work supported by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures—With References
Photo Credits: Page 3, crying boy: ? G.M.B. Akash/Panos Pictures; page 21, ants: Top: ? Bartomeu Borrell/age fotostock;
page 22, earth: Based on NASA/Visible Earth imagery

The Pathway to Peace and Happiness English (ph-E)
Made in the United States of America

We All Need
Guidance and Direction
Sanath was very worried.1 Many things were troubling
him. For a long time, he had been trying to ?nd stable
employment in order to care for his family. He wanted
his children to have a good education and a better future. But all of this seemed beyond reach. The best that
he could hope for was to remain healthy and keep on
working so that he could earn enough to provide food for
his family and pay the rent. But he was really concerned
—should something happen to him, who would look after his family?
Vasana, Sanath’s wife, was also worried. Lately, their
relationship had become very tense. Sanath was always tired when he got home from work. Vasana really wanted him to help her teach the children proper
manners and respect, but he had no time for them.
Vasana was sad that she and Sanath often argued,
and it was not really good for their children to see
that. Then, what if one of their children should
get sick? Where would they ?nd the money for
medicine and hospital care? Vasana did not even
want to think about the possibility!
Sanath and Vasana also noticed that conditions in their community were no longer what
they used to be. People had little time for one another, and the community spirit that the couple
so fondly remembered did not seem to exist any longer. They could see that all their friends and relatives
1 The information in this publication is presented in the form of a series of imagined conversations between two couples.

3

had problems similar to theirs and were worried about the
future. It appeared that no one had real peace of mind anymore. Vasana often thought about how nice it would be
to ?nd a solution to these problems and thus have some
peace and contentment. Even though Sanath and Vasana
tried very hard, it seemed that everything they were striving for was just out of reach.
One day, Sanath and Vasana talked about their troubles.
“Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could just ?nd the pathway to peace and happiness?” asked Sanath.
“Oh, yes!” Vasana responded. “I have been thinking
about that too. It would surely be the answer to all
our problems.”
“But there are so many religious ideas and philosophies of life,” Sanath replied. “How can we possibly ?nd out which one is the pathway to happiness?
We can’t examine them all! Besides, just about every
one of them claims to have the answer to life’s problems; yet, you have to admit that not one of them has
really made much di?erence in people’s life. To me, it
seems futile even to try.”
Although Vasana agreed with Sanath, deep down she
wanted to ?nd some help for her family. She felt that there
had to be a way somehow.
Perhaps you too are concerned about some of the things
that Sanath and Vasana were facing. Their problems are
common around the world. People everywhere long for
good health, peace of mind, and a happy family life. But it
all seems so di?cult to attain. Is there any hope of ?nding the pathway to peace and happiness?
4

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

The Search for
Practical Guidance
Vasana noticed that her neighbors, Buddhika and his wife,
Anushka, always seemed so contented and peaceful. She
told Sanath that she was going to ask Anushka what their
secret was. So the next time she saw Anushka, she asked
her.
“Well, Vasana, we really have the same sort of problems
and worries that you and Sanath have,” Anushka said.
“But not too long ago, I found a book that gives some very
practical guidance for me and my family. This book shows
us the pathway to peace and happiness. It helps us to be
happy despite the pressures and worries that we face every
day.”
Vasana was intrigued. Anushka explained more about
this book. “It is an ancient book from the Middle East
and the Orient. Yet, the book is for all people because it transcends all religious and sectarian divisions. In fact, it has been translated into hundreds
of languages, so that practically everyone can read
it.” Anushka also said that the book has often been
quoted by educators and that it has even been the
basis for the legal systems of many nations.
Vasana was really interested in seeing this
book. That afternoon, she went to Anushka’s home. There Anushka showed her the
practical guidance that this book o?ers on
these topics:

5

Raising children
“Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows
old he will not turn aside from it.”
“Fathers, do not be irritating your children.”

Work and money management
“Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work,
doing with his hands what is good work, that he may have something to distribute to someone in need.”
“If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”

Drugs and alcohol
“Let us cleanse ourselves of every de?lement of ?esh and spirit.”
“Wine is a ridiculer, intoxicating liquor is boisterous, and everyone going astray by it is not wise.”

Moral values
“Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be
without de?lement.”
“Abstain from fornication.”
“Everyone that keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a
passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his
heart.”

Respect in family life
“Honor your father and your mother.”
“Listen to your father who caused your birth, and do not despise
your mother just because she has grown old.”
“Let each one of you individually so love his wife as he does
himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect
for her husband.”
For those who have a Bible, we list here the source of the quotations above.
Proverbs 22:6; Ephesians 6:4
Ephesians 4:28; 2 Thessalonians 3:10
2 Corinthians 7:1; Proverbs 20:1
Hebrews 13:4; 1 Thessalonians 4:3; Matthew 5:28
Ephesians 6:2; Proverbs 23:22; Ephesians 5:33

6

Review Box
? What did Vasana notice about her neighbors?
? What are some of the things that Anushka showed Vasana?
? Which points of guidance do you ?nd valuable to you?
7

A Book That Is Extraordinary
When Sanath came home from work that evening, Vasana
told him all the things that Anushka had shown her. Sanath thought it was interesting, but he had heard others
talk about di?erent pathways to peace and happiness, so
he was a little skeptical. Still, he decided that he would
talk about this with Buddhika. The next Saturday, he did
just that.
“Yes, the book is called the Bible,” Buddhika told Sanath.
“I have been reading it, and I am fully convinced
that it is accurate and reliable.”
Sanath told Buddhika about his doubts. “We can
all see that there is no end to the poverty and
misery around us, and people of all races and nations are a?ected,” he observed. “What is more,
there are so many religions and philosophies that
claim to be the true pathway, yet none of them
have solved the problems of war, bad government,
racial hatred, and poverty. Why would what this
book says be any di?erent from all these religions
and philosophies?”
Buddhika showed Sanath something from the
Bible that really surprised Sanath. He showed
him that the Bible says: “Man has dominated
man to his injury” and “it does not belong to man who is
walking even to direct his step.” Sanath agreed that no
one could deny the truth of those words. They were realities of life in Sanath’s own country as well as in Western
lands.

8

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

Buddhika further explained to Sanath that he could put
con?dence in the Bible for many other reasons. “The Bible
not only provides sound guidance for everyday life, such
as the points Anushka showed Vasana,” said Buddhika,
“but it also clearly identi?es the cause of the problems facing mankind.” He added: “You know, Sanath, the Bible is
also scienti?cally accurate.”
Sanath was still doubtful. “How could such an ancient
book as the Bible be relevant to present-day problems and
be scienti?cally accurate?” he asked. He also wanted to
know who wrote this book.
“The Bible was not written by one man,” Buddhika explained. “It is actually a collection of 66 small books
written by more than 40 di?erent men over a period
of about 1,600 years, which ended around 1,900
years ago. Even though these writers had limited scienti?c knowledge, they wrote about facts
that became known only thousands of years later. For example, one Bible writer stated that the
earth is ‘hanging upon nothing,’ and another
described the earth as a circle, or sphere. These
facts were not generally known at the time of the
writing but were proved true by scientists only
in relatively recent times.”
“That is fascinating,” said Sanath. Buddhika wanted to show Sanath another equally fascinating point.
“About 200 years in advance, the Bible predicted the fall
of a major world power called Babylon.” Buddhika said.
“The Bible described how Babylon would be conquered,
and amazingly, it even mentioned the name of the conquering king long before he was born! Actually, there are
hundreds of prophecies in the Bible.”
A BOOK THAT IS EXTRAORDINARY

9

As Sanath was pondering all of this, Buddhika said something that Sanath found even more amazing. “Do you know
that the hardships that you and I and others are facing
today were predicted 1,900 years ago in the Bible?” He
read this passage to Sanath from the Bible:
“Know this, that in the last days critical times hard
to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of
themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
disloyal, having no natural a?ection, not open to any
agreement, slanderers, without self-control, ?erce,
without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong,
pu?ed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than
lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but
proving false to its power.”

The Bible foretold
many of the troubles
we see today

Buddhika told Sanath that other parts of the
Bible foretold that there would be troubles all over the
world, including wars, diseases, famines, earthquakes, and
lawlessness.
Sanath was surprised to see that many of the problems
that he and Vasana were experiencing had been accurately described so long ago in the Bible.
“How extraordinary!” Sanath exclaimed.
Ecclesiastes 8:9; Jeremiah 10:23
Job 26:7; Isaiah 40:22; 2 Timothy 3:1-5

Review Box
? Why was Sanath a little doubtful about what Vasana told him?
? What did Buddhika say about the Bible and about how it was
written?
? What interesting things did Buddhika point out so that Sanath
could put con?dence in the Bible?
10

Promises That We Can Trust
Sanath thought a lot about what Buddhika had told him.
Of course, it was not the ?rst time that Sanath had heard
about the Bible. He had always known that it is a holy
book, but now he began to think that if the Bible really contains true prophecies, perhaps it is more than
just an ancient holy book. Yet, he wondered how those
men who wrote down the words in the Bible could have
known those scienti?c facts and historical events so
far in advance. Where did their knowledge come from?
Sanath and Vasana went to visit Buddhika and Anushka
the next day, and Sanath asked Buddhika that very question: “How could the writers have known all those things
so far in advance?”

God directed men to
write down his promises
for our bene?t

Buddhika explained: “The men who wrote those things
were not the originators, or authors, of what they wrote.
They were like secretaries who wrote down information given them by someone else. The real Author was actually
our original Father.”
“Our original Father?” asked Sanath. “Who is he?”
“He is the One who gave us life originally,” Buddhika explained. “And, like any real father, He also has a name.”
Turning in his Bible to Psalm 83:18, Buddhika read to
Sanath:
“That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah,
you alone are the Most High over all the earth.”

Buddhika showed Sanath another text in the Bible. It described Jehovah as “the One telling from the beginning
the ?nale, and from long ago the things that have not been
THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

11

done.” (Isaiah 46:10) To explain this verse, Buddhika said:
“Just as our natural father has more experience in life and
often knows much more than we do, Jehovah, our original Father, is greater in knowledge and wisdom than all
of us and can even foretell the future. For this reason, he
was able to let the Bible writers know what to write about
the future.”
“Does Jehovah know what future Vasana and I will have?”
Sanath wanted to know.
“Well,” Buddhika explained, “Jehovah does not determine
in advance the outcome of each person’s life individually.
But like a father, he knows our problems, and he wants
to help us.”
Buddhika told Sanath that from the Bible, they could
?nd out what Jehovah would do to help them have a
happy and peaceful life. They could also learn how the
decisions they make could a?ect them now and in the
future.
Sanath thought that all of this was very logical because
he too was a father, and he would do all that he could to
help his children to have a happy future. Buddhika was
happy to show Sanath and Vasana some of the promises that are contained in the Bible. These are a few of the
things he showed them:
“He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”
—Psalm 46:9.
“They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and
they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They
will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will
not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days
of a tree will the days of my people be.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
12

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

“There will come to be plenty of grain on the
earth; on the top of the mountains there will
be an over?ow.”—Psalm 72:16.
“He will wipe out every tear from their
eyes, and death will be no more, neither
will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed
away.”—Revelation 21:4.

Sanath was touched by all these wonderful promises in the Bible. He really liked
the idea of a world where everyone would
be treated justly, where sickness and death
would be no more, and where there would
be plenty of food for everyone. Vasana was
impressed too, but she thought it was all
too good to be true.
“I can well understand how you feel, Vasana,” said Buddhika. “But think about this:
Just as we have seen, many other prophecies in the Bible have been accurately ful?lled. Does that not assure us that these
promises will also be ful?lled? Actually, the
Author of the Bible guarantees their ful?llment with these words: ‘Write, because
these words are faithful and true.’ ”—Revelation 21:5.

The Bible tells about
the wonderful future that
awaits us

Review Box
? How did the men who wrote down the words in the Bible
know what to write?
? Who actually is the Author of the Bible?
? What future does the Bible promise for mankind?
? Why are the promises in the Bible trustworthy?

13

Getting to Know
the Originator of All Things
Sanath was happy to learn about all the things that Jehovah had promised, but he wondered how anyone could
have the power to ful?ll these promises. Buddhika explained that to understand how Jehovah could do everything he promised, they could think about a basic idea
that everyone was familiar with—the law of cause and effect.
Buddhika said that this basic fact is also explained in
the Bible, and he showed Sanath this Bible text:
“Every house is constructed by someone.”—Hebrews 3:4.

“That seems logical,” Sanath responded. “Surely, no house can come about without a builder.”
“To take your observation one step further,”
said Buddhika, “I might add that no meal was
ever prepared without a cook.”
Then Buddhika reminded Sanath that all
around them were things much greater and
more complex than a house. “Look at the
delicate ?owers, the majestic mountains,
the powerful sea, and the boundless universe,” he said. “If a house needs a designer
and a builder and a meal has to be prepared
by a cook, then what about all the marvelous things in the universe? Do they not also
require a Designer and Maker?”

14

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

Sanath had to agree that Buddhika had a
good point.
“The Bible says that, indeed, there is an
original Designer and Maker of all things,”
Buddhika continued. “Of course, to be the
Maker of all things, this One would have to
be a powerful and mighty Person. That is
why the Bible calls him God. In the original language of the Bible, this word means
‘Mighty One’ or ‘Strong One.’ Today, there
are many whom people call ‘gods,’ but because Jehovah made all things, he is rightly called Almighty God.”
Sanath was surprised to see that the Bible describes the many wonderful works of
Jehovah God. These are a few examples of
what Buddhika showed him:
“In the beginning God created the heavens
and the earth.”—Genesis 1:1.
“Know that Jehovah is God. It is he that has
made us, and not we ourselves.”—Psalm
100:3.
“The heavens are declaring the glory of God;
and of the work of his hands the expanse is
telling.”—Psalm 19:1.
“He who is building in the heavens his stairs,
and his structure over the earth that he
founded; he who is calling for the waters of
the sea, that he may pour them out upon
the surface of the earth—Jehovah is his
name.”—Amos 9:6.

GETTING TO KNOW THE ORIGINATOR OF ALL THINGS

Everything requires
a designer and maker

15

Yes, Jehovah God is the Maker of all things. But he
did more than just form, or make, things. He gave life
to all creatures. “With you is the source of life,” the Bible says of Jehovah. (Psalm 36:9) So he is the Giver of
life, the Creator. Since Jehovah is the Originator of life,
he truly is our Father. That is why the Bible says: “Is
it not one father that all of us have? Is it not one God
that has created us?”—Malachi 2:10.
“Well, well!” Sanath exclaimed. “I must say that when
we look at the things around us and think about them,
it is not hard to see that there has to be an original cause, a Designer, a Life-Giver—a Creator.”
“If he had the power to create all these things,”
Vasana joined in excitedly, “then he must also
have the power to ful?ll all the promises he made
in the Bible!”
To Sanath and Vasana, everything they heard
that day made perfect sense, but they wondered
what sort of Person this powerful Designer is.
Jehovah is
the Source of life

Review Box
? Why is it logical to think that there is an Originator of all the things
that surround us?
? Why does the Bible call the Originator Almighty God?
? What are some of the things that the Bible says God made?
? Why is God also the Creator?
16

A God of Love and Justice
“Let me ask you, Sanath and Vasana, when you look at a
child, do you often see in him characteristics of his parents?” Buddhika asked.
“Why, yes!” answered Sanath. “I often say that our
daughter looks so much like her mother. She even has
her mother’s personality.”
“Yes, she really does,” Buddhika replied. “So we can
say the same about our Maker, our Father. By looking at ourselves and the things Jehovah has made,
we can ?nd out about his qualities, what kind of
Person he is.”
“That’s interesting. I never thought about that,”
said Sanath.
“This is actually what the Bible tells us,” Buddhika explained. “See what Romans 1:20 says: ‘His invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s
creation onward, because they are perceived by the
things made, even his eternal power and Godship.’ ”
Sanath asked how this was the case.
“Well, Sanath, think about the love that a father has
for his children. A good father, like you, always cares
for his children. Sometimes a child might be disobedient or disrespectful to his father, but the father would
still provide for and love the child. Why would a father do
this? It is because Jehovah created in parents the capacity for natural a?ection and love for their children. This
love, Sanath, is a re?ection of the love that Jehovah has
for us.
THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

We resemble our
parents in some ways

17

“Even if we did not know Jehovah, he would still provide
for us through the things he has made,” Buddhika continued. “That is why the Bible says at Matthew 5:45: ‘Prove
yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens, since
he makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and
makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous.’ We
certainly bene?t from rain and sunshine, don’t we? They
keep us alive and help us to grow our food. And Jehovah
continues to supply us with these essentials whether we
show any gratitude or not. Is this not evidence that Jehovah is a God of love? In fact, the Bible says that love is Jehovah’s principal quality; it is the essence of Jehovah God.
At 1 John 4:8, we read that ‘God is love.’ ”
Next, Buddhika asked Sanath to think
about the quality of justice. “As a good
father, you love and care for your children in a just or fair manner, don’t
you? You also teach them to respect
others and to live by the standards
of behavior that you believe will help
them grow up to be responsible people.
It is obvious that humans have a yearning for justice, both for themselves and their
families. We want to be treated justly, and we
want people to respect our need for justice.
Why? Again, it is because we are re?ecting the
qualities of our Creator.”

Jehovah lovingly
provides what makes
life possible

18

Buddhika then showed Sanath and Vasana these
scriptures about Jehovah God:
“All his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness, with whom
there is no injustice.”—Deuteronomy 32:4.
“He is a lover of righteousness and justice.”—Psalm 33:5.
THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

Yes, we love justice because Jehovah, our Creator, loves justice, and we are created in his image, that is, we are created with many of Jehovah’s qualities, which we can manifest to some degree in our life. (Genesis 1:27) But Jehovah
did not leave it to us to determine what is just and what
is not. He has established standards and laws by which
he wants his earthly children to live. It is when God’s laws
are broken that injustice occurs.
“There is another remarkable thing I want you
to think about,” Buddhika continued. “Do you
know that the laws of most countries are in
many ways similar to those that were written in the Bible thousands of years ago?”
Sanath and Vasana were surprised.
“For example,” Buddhika went on, “the
laws of many lands include prohibitions
against murder, stealing, and adultery.
These were all written down in the Bible more
than 3,500 years ago. When we live by these
just standards from Jehovah God, we are re?ecting God’s justice, and we can have a happier
and more satisfying life.”
After listening to all that Buddhika had
said, Sanath and Vasana now appreciated that Jehovah is a loving Person and a
God of justice. They had always felt that
love and justice were among the most important qualities that people should show
in their dealings with others. They had always tried to be loving and just with their
children. Now they understood that these
Laws against
wrongdoing are
a re?ection of
Jehovah’s justice

A GOD OF LOVE AND JUSTICE

19

deep-seated desires were actually a re?ection of the qualities of the Creator, Jehovah God.

Sanath was really excited about getting to know the qualities of Jehovah. It made Jehovah real to him—so much so
that he began to think that perhaps he should do something about showing more love to his wife and children.
He thought that it would be good to imitate Jehovah by
being loving, just, and fair with everyone.
“That is very good, Sanath,” Buddhika responded happily. “The way you are thinking is very much in harmony
with what the Bible recommends. In fact, there is a very
famous statement in the Bible that I want to show you.”
Opening the Bible, Buddhika read the following words to
Sanath:
“All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also
must likewise do to them.”—Matthew 7:12.

Buddhika said that Jehovah has many other ?ne qualities besides love and justice. Sanath and Vasana wanted
Buddhika to show them more about Jehovah’s wonderful
qualities.

Review Box
? What can help us to learn more about God?—Romans 1:20.
? What is God’s principal quality?—1 John 4:8.
? How does God show love to us every day?—Matthew 5:45.
? How does God feel about justice?—Psalm 33:5.
20

? How can we imitate God’s justice?—Matthew 7:12.

A God Full of Wisdom
and Great in Power
Buddhika explained that the things God has made also
reveal some of his other qualities. He read to Sanath and
Vasana this interesting verse from the Bible.
“How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions.”
—Psalm 104:24.

“Even the tiniest insects can show us something about
the wisdom of Jehovah,” Buddhika said. “For example, the
Bible talks about the instinctive wisdom of the ant.”
Buddhika reminded Sanath that they had often
seen ants busily nipping o? pieces of leaves to carry to their nests. How do they know to do this? One
of the Bible writers explained that the ant is “instinctively wise.” Who, though, made it that way?
Who put this instinctive wisdom in the ant? The Bible answers that it was Jehovah, the Producer of heaven and earth.—Proverbs 30:24, 25.
“I have to agree that creatures with such instinctive
wisdom must have had a Designer and Creator,” replied Sanath.
Buddhika then said something that made a deep impression on Sanath and Vasana: “Do you realize that our
very existence depends on Jehovah’s wisdom?” They wondered how that could be.

Instinctive wisdom
did not come about
by chance

Buddhika explained that it was absolutely amazing to him
that conditions on the earth are just right for life to ?ourish. The speed of the earth’s rotation on its axis and the
THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

21

speed of its movement in its orbit around the
sun are such that solar energy is distributed
to the planet’s surface in the best way possible.
Gravity keeps earth’s vital atmosphere—consisting of just the right mixture of gases—from
escaping. Yet, the gravitational pull is not so
strong as to hamper our freedom of movement.
There is also a vast supply of water, which is
absolutely essential for life to continue. Even
the soil is ?lled with nourishment that readily
combines with water to be absorbed and used
by plants.
Earth’s rotation on its
axis makes life possible

“I strongly believe that it could not be by blind
chance that all these things are the way they
are,” said Buddhika. “I am convinced that it is the Source
of unlimited wisdom, Jehovah God, who puts into operation all that is necessary for life to exist.”
Sanath and Vasana nodded in silent agreement.
Buddhika mentioned another quality of God that impressed them—power. Sanath wanted to see what the Bible has to say about Jehovah’s power. Buddhika opened
the Bible and read this verse to him:
“O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Here you yourself have made the
heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm.”—Jeremiah 32:17.

“We can get some idea of Jehovah’s great power by considering the power of the sun,” said Buddhika. “When you
stand outside on a bright, sunny day, you feel the warmth
of the sun, don’t you? Have you any idea how powerful the
sun is?”

22

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

“I know it can get very hot around here before the monsoon season,” answered Sanath, and Vasana agreed.
Buddhika told them that he had read that at the sun’s
core, the temperature is about 27 million degrees Fahrenheit. If you could take a pinhead-sized piece of the sun’s
core and put it here on the earth, you could not safely
stand within about 100 miles of that tiny heat source!
Every second, the sun emits energy equivalent to the explosion of many hundreds of millions of nuclear bombs.
“If the sun has such tremendous power, what power
must the Maker of the sun have?” Buddhika asked.
“We cannot even imagine his power. When we observe the sun, we see just a tiny evidence of the
boundless power of its Creator, Jehovah.”
Sanath and Vasana had to agree with Buddhika
that all these wonderful things could not have happened by chance. There had to be a Creator. They
began to understand that although the Creator, Jehovah, is an invisible Spirit, he is a real Person who
displays perfect love, justice, wisdom, and power in
all the things he has made.
What power the
Maker of the sun
must have!

Review Box
? What outstanding quality of Jehovah God is clearly revealed in
creation, according to Psalm 104:24?
? Looking at the things around us, what examples of God’s wisdom
can you see?—Proverbs 30:24, 25.
? What other quality of Jehovah is seen in creation, according to Jeremiah 32:17?
? What evidence of God’s power can you observe from the things
he has made?
23

An End to All Problems
All the information that Buddhika shared about Jehovah
really impressed Sanath, but something was still troubling
him. He asked Buddhika: “If Jehovah is such a powerful
and loving Person who created all things, why is there so
much trouble on earth? Why do we have so many problems?”
“This is a very good question, and many people have been
puzzled by it,” Buddhika told Sanath. “When we consider the qualities of Jehovah God, it should be clear that
the current bad conditions on earth cannot
be what he wants for his earthly children.
For this reason, to understand why things
are the way they are, we need to understand
what God’s original purpose for the earth
was and what has happened to it.”
Buddhika then explained to Sanath how Jehovah God felt when he ?nished his earthly
creative work. Here is the verse that Buddhika read:
“God saw everything he had made and, look! it was
very good.”—Genesis 1:31.

The crowning glory of Jehovah’s creation
was the ?rst human couple. Their names
were Adam and Eve. God created them perfect, just as the rest of his creation was, so
that they could live forever on earth. God
put them in a beautiful park called the garden of Eden. There, they were supplied with
everything they needed for a happy life. They
24

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

lacked nothing. (Genesis 2:8, 9) Furthermore, Jehovah told
them to have many children and ?ll the earth and subdue it. (Genesis 1:28) This means that eventually the whole
planet would become one large Paradise ?lled with a perfect, happy family of people. What a marvelous prospect!
What went wrong? Buddhika showed Sanath a simple explanation from the Bible:
“Through one man sin entered into the world
and death through sin, and thus death spread to
all men because they had all sinned.”—Romans
5:12.

As a loving Father, Jehovah God gave Adam
and Eve certain rules, or standards, by which
they could continue to live and care for the paradise. (Genesis 2:15-17) And as a wise Father,
Jehovah did not force them to do what he said
but allowed them to show their love for him by
choosing to be his obedient children. Like us,
Adam and Eve had freedom of choice. What did
they do?
Sadly, Adam and Eve chose not to follow the direction of
their Creator. They went their own way. Because of this,
they sinned. To sin means to miss the mark of perfection.
Soon, Adam and Eve began to grow old and die. This was
exactly what Jehovah God had said would happen to them
if they did not hold to his standards.—Genesis 2:17.
Since all of us are the o?spring of Adam and Eve, we have
inherited their imperfection, and that is why we grow old
and die. However, to reassure Sanath, Buddhika pointed
out that Jehovah’s purpose for mankind has not changed.
As a loving Father, Jehovah still wants humans to enjoy
AN END TO ALL PROBLEMS

25

life on a paradise earth. Buddhika showed Sanath and
Vasana this Bible verse:
“This is what Jehovah has said, the Creator of
the heavens, He the true God, the Former of
the earth and the Maker of it, He the One
who ?rmly established it, who did not create
it simply for nothing, who formed it even to
be inhabited.”—Isaiah 45:18.

Buddhika reminded Sanath and Vasana of all the beautiful promises in the
Bible. There would be no more sickness,
pain, and su?ering; there would be plenty of food and good housing for everyone;
and there would be no more death. All
these blessings were part of God’s original, unchangeable purpose for mankind
—life without end on a paradise earth.
Buddhika showed Sanath this promise:
“The righteous themselves will possess the
earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”
—Psalm 37:29.
God’s original
purpose for the
earth will be
realized

That is what Jehovah God promised,
and that is what will come true.

Review Box
? What is God’s purpose for mankind?—Genesis 1:28.
? What requirement did God place on the ?rst human couple?
—Genesis 2:15-17.
? What was the result of Adam and Eve’s disobedience?—Romans
5:12.
26

? What has happened to Jehovah’s original purpose for the earth
and mankind?—Psalm 37:29; Isaiah 45:18.

Peace and Happiness Soon!
Sanath and Vasana were thrilled to know that one day
the earth would be ?lled with good and honest people
who would treat one another in a loving way. They thought
about how wonderful life would be in a world without hunger, sickness, or death, a world in which peace and happiness would be everyone’s lot. How they wished all of this
could come immediately!
“When will all these things happen?” Sanath wanted to
know.
“It is interesting that you should ask that question,” Buddhika told Sanath. “Let me ask you, Sanath, do you remember hearing about the man named Jesus?”
“Yes, I have heard of him,” Sanath replied. “I understand
that he said some very wise things. But what does that
have to do with my question?”
“Well, some 2,000 years ago, when Jesus was on
earth, his followers, or disciples, asked the same
question that you did,” Buddhika explained. “In
answer, Jesus gave them a ‘sign’ that would be
made up of many events. He told them that when
all the events making up the sign should appear
together, that would be the time the promised
change is near.”—Matthew 24:3.
“A sign?” inquired Sanath. “That’s interesting. Tell
us about it.”
“The various aspects of this sign are all written down in
the Bible,” Buddhika told Sanath. Opening the Bible, he
said: “Here are a few of them.”
THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

27

“Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.”—Matthew 24:7.
“There will be food shortages.”—Matthew 24:7.
“Increasing of lawlessness.”—Matthew 24:12.
“Great earthquakes.”—Luke 21:11.
“In one place after another pestilences.”—Luke 21:11.

Right away, Sanath and Vasana said that all these
things seemed to be happening today. In fact, for that
very reason, they felt troubled and anxious about the
future.
“The ful?llment of this sign means that Jehovah God’s
rulership over the earth will soon take e?ect,” Buddhika said. “The Bible calls this new rulership, or government, God’s Kingdom.” Buddhika then read a Bible verse
that shows what this Kingdom will shortly do:
“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a
kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom
itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush
and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand
to times inde?nite.”—Daniel 2:44.
Features of “the sign”
showing that changes
will soon come.
Do you see them?

“When God’s Kingdom asserts its rulership over the earth,”
Buddhika continued, “all wickedness, injustice, and corruption will be gone forever. What a wonderful thing to contemplate!”

All of this was very exciting to Sanath and Vasana, and
they very much wanted to be a part of this peaceful new
world.
“Is there something that Vasana and I must do so that we
can have that wonderful future?” Sanath asked.

28

THE PATHWAY TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

“You know very well, Sanath and Vasana, that
anything worthwhile has its price,” Buddhika replied. “Think of Adam and Eve and what they lost.
What can you learn from the way they acted?”
“They lost perfect life in Paradise because they
did not live in harmony with God’s requirements,”
said Sanath.
“In much the same way, Jehovah God has requirements for us today,” Buddhika explained. “If we
want to enjoy life in the Paradise that he will soon
bring about on earth, we need to learn about him
and his requirements and strive to live in harmony with
them.”
Sanath agreed that all of that was very reasonable, but
he wondered how he and Vasana could possibly do so.

Jehovah invites us
to walk on the
path to peace and
happiness

“To obey Jehovah God is not a burden because, as our loving Father, he asks us to do only what is in our best interests,” Buddhika assured him. “He not only shows us
the pathway to a peaceful new world but also invites us
to be guided by him along the way. Notice this loving invitation found in the Bible.”
“I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to bene?t
yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which
you should walk. O if only you would actually pay attention
to my commandments! Then your peace would become
just like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of
the sea. And your o?spring would become just like the
sand, and the descendants from your inward parts like the
grains of it. One’s name would not be cut o? or be annihilated from before me.”——Isaiah 48:17-19.

Sanath and Vasana both felt the warmth of those beautiful words. They really wanted a way of life that would
PEACE AND HAPPINESS SOON!

29

bene?t them and their family. In fact, they could think of
nothing better than to live with all their children in a righteous and peaceful world.
“All these wonderful blessings can be yours if you learn
what Jehovah God is teaching us and try your best to follow it,” Buddhika told them.
“How do we go about learning all these things?” Sanath
asked eagerly. “Could you and Anushka help us?”
“We would be delighted to do so. In fact, we have just what
you need to help you ?nd and pursue the pathway to peace
and happiness!”

Review Box
? What question similar to Sanath’s did Jesus’ disciples ask?
—Matthew 24:3.
? What “sign” did Jesus give?—Matthew 24:7, 12; Luke 21:11.
? Do you see this “sign” being ful?lled today?
30

? What help did Sanath and Vasana want from Buddhika and
Anushka?

To Find Out More
Buddhika told Sanath and Vasana that he and
Anushka would be happy to help them learn more
about all the wonderful things they had been
discussing. He showed them a book called What
Does the Bible Really Teach?

DOES
WHAT LE
THE BIB H?
EAC
Really T

When Sanath and Vasana examined the book, they saw
in the table of contents many subjects that they had always wondered about. Buddhika then explained that the
book has many interesting features. He said:
“Each chapter starts with several questions that highlight
what is considered in that chapter. It then ends with a
box entitled ‘What the Bible Teaches,’ providing a summary of the key points of the chapter and the Bible texts
that support them. There are many instructive illustrations throughout the book, and the material is written in
a style that is easy to read and understand.”
Sanath and Vasana were eager to start reading the book.
They were looking forward to learning more about all the
things Buddhika had told them and making sure that
these things were not just a dream. And Sanath and Vasana were grateful to Buddhika and Anushka for their willingness to help them ?nd the pathway to peace and happiness.

31

Find out the answers to these important
questions:
? How can we ?nd the pathway to peace and
happiness?
? Whom can we trust to provide practical guidance
for life?
? Why are there so many bad things happening
around us?
? Who can bring justice and peace to the world?
? When will there be true peace and happiness?
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Without obligation, I request a copy of the book
What Does the Bible Really Teach?
Indicate which language.
WHAT DOES
THE BIBLE
Really TEACH?



 Please contact me concerning a free home
Bible study.

Name 
Address 


City  State  ZIP Code 

Would you welcome more information?
You may download a copy of the publication pictured above from www.jw.org or fill in the
coupon and mail it to an appropriate address listed at www.jw.org/contact.

ph-E

