REAL FAITH
Your Key to a

Happy Life

CONTENTS
SECTION

PAGE

1

Does God Care About Us?

3

2

What Is Real Faith?

4

3

Practical Counsel That Improves Lives

6

4

Who Is God?

10

5

Appreciating God’s Matchless Qualities

12

6

What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?

15

7

What God Promised Through the Prophets

18

8

The Messiah Appears

20

9

Learning From Messiah the Leader

22

10

Exposing the Enemy of Faith

24

11

Showing Real Faith Today

26

12

Show That You Have Real Faith!

28

13

Real Faith Leads to Everlasting Happiness

30

Photo Credits: Page 13, bottom: Todd Bolen/BiblePlaces.com;
page 25, globe: Based on NASA/Visible Earth imagery

This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
educational work supported by voluntary donations.
To make a donation, please visit www.jw.org.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures—With References.
Real Faith—Your Key to a Happy Life
October 2016 Printing
English (rk-E)
5 2010
Monominoto Seisho Sasshi Kyokai
Publishers
Monominoto Seisho Sasshi Kyokai

Made in Canada

1 Does God Care About Us?
TODAY’S world is full of problems. Wars, natural disasters, sickness, poverty, corruption, and other evils a?ict millions of people. You
too may face daily worries. Who can
help us? Does anyone care?
We can be sure that God truly cares.
In his Holy Word, he states: “Can a
wife forget her suckling so that she
should not pity the son of her belly?
Even these women can forget, yet I myself shall not forget you.”1
Is that not comforting to know?
God’s love is far greater than a mother’s tender compassion for her baby
1 See Isaiah 49:15 in the Holy Scriptures.

—one of the strongest human emotions. Never will God abandon us! Indeed, he has already come to our aid in
a marvelous way. How? By showing us
the key to a happy life—real faith.
Having genuine faith will make you
happy. Such faith will help you to
avoid many problems and to deal successfully with problems you cannot
avoid. It will also draw you close to
God, bringing you peace of mind
and heart. And real faith leads to a
wonderful future—everlasting life in
Paradise!
But what is real faith? And how can
you cultivate it?

God’s love for us is
greater than that of a
mother for her baby

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

3

2 What Is Real Faith?
HAVING real faith is more than just believing that God exists. There are millions of people who believe in God
yet deliberately do wicked deeds. Such
“faith” is like counterfeit money. It
looks real but is actually worthless.
What, then, is real faith?
Real faith is based on accurate knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. These inspired writings tell us the truth about
God and enable us to get to know him.
They reveal his laws, purposes, and
teachings. These teachings include:
? God is one. He has no equal.
? Jesus is not Almighty God. He is
God’s prophet.
? God condemns idolatry in all its
forms.

? Humans face a coming day of
judgment.
? Countless dead humans will be
resurrected to Paradise.
Real faith moves us to do fine works.
Such works honor God and also bene?t us and others. These ?ne works include such things as
? worshipping God.
? cultivating godly qualities
—especially love.
? rejecting evil thoughts
and desires.
? maintaining faith in God
despite trials.
? teaching others about
God.

God Safeguards His Word
We can be sure that God has kept
the Holy Scriptures in a pure form for
us today. God Almighty can protect
his own book. His Word states: “The
green grass has dried up, the blossom
has withered; but as for the word of
our God, it will last to time indefinite.”
—Isaiah 40:8.

4

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

Like money, faith must be
real to have value

How Can You Cultivate Real Faith?

Ask God for help. The prophet Moses
prayed to God: “Make me know, please,
your ways, that I may know you, in order that I may ?nd favor in your eyes.”1
God heard and answered his prayer.
Moses became an outstanding example
of faith. God will also help you to cultivate real faith.
Make time to study the Holy Scriptures.
Inspired Scriptures, including the Torah, the Psalms, and the Gospels, may
be found in the Holy Bible, the most
widely translated and distributed book

in the world. Do you have a copy of
these inspired writings?
Apply the counsel of the Holy Writings
in your daily life. Faith, like a muscle,
grows through use. As you exercise
your faith, it too will grow. You will
see ?rsthand that God’s advice works.
Indeed, the practical counsel found
in the Holy Scriptures has improved
countless lives. Read on to consider
some examples.

1 Exodus 33:13.

How Would You Answer?
Faith, like a
muscle, grows
through use

Real faith
produces good
works

? Real faith is based on what?
? Real faith prompts what ?ne
deeds?
? How can you cultivate real faith?

3 Practical Counsel That
Improves Lives
IMAGINE that a new doctor moved
into your area. At ?rst you may be a little wary of him. But what if some of
your friends sought his help and their
health improved dramatically? Might
you not consider consulting that doctor too?
In some ways, the Holy Scriptures
are like that doctor. Some people are
wary of consulting them. But when
they apply the wise counsel found
therein, their lives improve dramatically. Consider some examples.
Resolving Marriage Problems
“Early in my marriage, I felt that Dumas, my husband, neglected me,” recalls Sumiatun. “In frustration, I often
screamed abuse at him, hurled objects
at him, even hit him. Sometimes I got
so worked up, I fainted.

“When Dumas began to study the
Holy Scriptures, I mocked him. But secretly I listened in on his studies from
the next room. One day, I heard some
verses read: ‘Let wives be in subjection
to their husbands as to the Lord . . . The
wife should have deep respect for her
husband.’ (Ephesians 5:22, 33) These
words touched my heart. I asked God
to forgive me for abusing my husband,
and I prayed for His help to become a
better wife. Soon Dumas and I were
studying the Scriptures together.”
The Holy Scriptures also say: “Husbands ought to be loving their wives
6

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

as their own bodies.” (Ephesians 5:
28) Sumiatun relates: “Learning these
things a?ected us both. I began to
bring Dumas a cup of tea when he
came home from work and to speak to
him in a kind way. Dumas, in turn,
showed me more a?ection and helped
me with the household chores. We
both worked to ‘become kind to one
another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another.’ (Ephesians
4:32) In turn, our love and respect for
each other steadily grew. Now we have
been happily married for over 40 years.
The wise counsel in God’s Word saved
our marriage!”

Dumas and
Sumiatun

Controlling Anger
“I had a violent temper,” says Tayib.
“I got into many ?ghts and often
threatened others with a gun. I also
beat my wife, Kustriyah, knocking her
to the ground in a rage. Many people
feared me.

Kustriyah and Tayib pray
together every night

Goin

“One day, I read Jesus’ words: ‘I am
giving you a new commandment, that
you love one another; just as I have
loved you.’ (John 13:34) I was deeply
moved, and I determined to change.
When anger welled up inside me, I
prayed to God for help to stay calm. My
anger soon subsided. My wife and I applied the counsel of Ephesians 4:26,
27: ‘Let the sun not set with you in
a provoked state, neither allow place
for the Devil.’ We read the Scriptures
and prayed together every night. This
swept away the tensions of the day and
drew us closer together.
“Now I am known as a man of peace.
My wife and children love and respect
me. I have many friends, and I feel
close to God. I am a truly happy man.”
Overcoming Drug Abuse
“I ran with a gang of youths, was a
heavy smoker, and regularly spent the
night collapsed in the street, drunk,”
says Goin. “I also used and sold illicit
drugs—marijuana and ecstasy—which
I kept hidden under my bulletproof
vest. Although I looked and acted
tough, I lived in constant fear.

“Then someone showed me this
scripture: ‘My son, my law do not forget . . . because length of days and
years of life and peace will be added
to you.’ (Proverbs 3:1, 2) I yearned for
a long and peaceful life! I also read:
REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

7

‘Since we have these promises, beloved
ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every
de?lement of ?esh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God’s fear.’ (2 Corinthians 7:1) So I quit drugs, cut o? my association with the gang, and started
serving God.
“I have now been drug-free for over
17 years. I enjoy good health, a happy
family, good friends, and a clear conscience. And instead of lying in the
street drunk, I sleep peacefully in bed
every night.”

that I hated! I also saw that within
the study group, di?erent races mixed
freely and happily. I was amazed! I
then understood the scripture that
says: ‘God is not partial, but in every
nation the man that fears him and
works righteousness is acceptable to
him.’—Acts 10:34-35.

Conquering Racial Prejudice
“As a teenager, I lived a life of crime,”
recalls Bambang, “and most of my victims belonged to an ethnic minority
that I hated.

Abandoning Violence
“While still a teenager, I was jailed
three times—twice for stealing and
once for brutally stabbing a man,” says
Garoga. “Later, I joined a rebel group
and killed many people. After the con?ict ended, I ran an extortion racket as
a crime boss. My bodyguards accompanied me everywhere. I was a violent
and dangerous man.

“In time, however, I began searching for God. My search led me to a
group that met to study the Holy Scriptures. There, I was greeted warmly by
people of the very ethnic background
Bambang now enjoys happy
association with people of
di?erent races

“Today, my heart is no longer poisoned by prejudice. Some of my best
friends belong to the ethnic group I
once hated. Through the Holy Scriptures, God has taught me to love.”

Garoga is no longer a violent
man but a respected teacher
of God’s Word

“Then, one day, I read this scripture: ‘Love is long-su?ering and kind.
Love is not jealous, it does not brag,
does not get pu?ed up, does not behave indecently, does not look for its
own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the
injury.’ (1 Corinthians 13:4, 5) Those
words touched my heart. I moved to a
new area, studied the Scriptures, and
applied their counsel in my life.

things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be
fully competent, completely equipped
for every good work.”—2 Timothy 3:
16, 17.
Therefore, let us consider some basic teachings found in the Holy Scriptures.

“Now I am no longer a violent man.
Instead, I am respected as a teacher of
God’s Word. My life has true direction
and purpose.”
God’s Word Exerts Power
These and countless other experiences prove that “the word of God is
alive and exerts power.” (Hebrews 4:
12) Its counsel is simple, practical, and
upbuilding.

What Do You Think?
? Which of the above experiences
impressed you the most? Why?
? How can the Holy Scriptures help
you?

Can the Holy Scriptures help you
too? Yes, they can, with whatever
problem you may be facing. “All Scripture is inspired of God and bene?cial
for teaching, for reproving, for setting
REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

9

4 Who Is God?
PEOPLE worship many gods. But the
Holy Scriptures teach that there is only
one true God. He is unique, supreme,
and eternal. He created everything in
heaven and on earth, and he gave us
life. Therefore, he alone is worthy of
our worship.
God has many titles but only one
personal name—JEHOVAH. God told
Moses: “This is what you are to say to
the sons of Israel, ‘Jehovah the God of
your forefathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my
name to time inde?nite, and this is
the memorial of me to generation after
generation.” (Exodus 3:15) The name
Jehovah appears some 7,000 times in
the Holy Scriptures. As Psalm 83:18
says about God, “you, whose name is
Jehovah, you alone are the Most High
over all the earth.”
No human has ever seen God. God
told Moses: “You are not able to see
my face, because no man may see me
and yet live.” (Exodus 33:20) God lives
in the heavens and is invisible to human eyes. It is wrong to make or pray
to an idol, picture, or symbol of God.
Jehovah God commanded through
the prophet Moses: “You must not
make for yourself a carved image or a
form like anything that is in the heavens above or that is on the earth underneath or that is in the waters under
the earth. You must not bow down to
them nor be induced to serve them,
10

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

Ancient Dead Sea Scroll
scripture manuscript showing
God’s name

because I Jehovah your God am a God
exacting exclusive devotion.” (Exodus
20:2-5) Later, through the prophet Isaiah, God said: “I am Jehovah. That is
my name; and to no one else shall I
give my own glory, neither my praise
to graven images.”—Isaiah 42:8.
Some people believe in God but
may view him as unknowable and unapproachable, someone to fear rather
than to love. What do you think? Is
God interested in you personally? Can
you really get to know him, even draw
close to him? Let us see what the Scriptures say about God’s personal qualities.

God’s Holy Spirit and
His Angels

The Law was given through the
prophet Moses as “the word spoken
through angels”

How Would You Answer?
? Why should we worship God?
? What is God’s name?
? Why should we not use idols or
symbols to worship God?
? How does God use his holy
spirit and angels to accomplish
his will?

How does God accomplish his
will? One way is by sending forth his
holy spirit. God’s spirit is, not a
conscious being or an angel, but his
invisible active force, the limitless
energy that he projects to accomplish
whatever he chooses. God used this
force to create heaven and earth.
“By the word of Jehovah the heavens
themselves were made, and by the
spirit of his mouth all their army.”
(Psalm 33:6) Genesis 1:2 explains that
when the earth was still covered with
water and God was preparing the earth
for human habitation, “God’s active
force was moving to and fro over the
surface of the waters.” God then used
his holy spirit to create all forms of life
on earth.
God also uses angels to carry out
his will. God created them to live in
heaven with him. Angels are very
powerful. They convey divine messages
and perform other important tasks.
For example, the Scriptures refer to the
Law given through the prophet Moses
as “the word spoken through angels.”
God’s angels also help his servants on
earth. In fact, the Scriptures call God’s
angels “spirits for public service,
sent forth to minister for those who
are going to inherit salvation.”
—Hebrews 1:14; 2:2.

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

11

5 Appreciating God’s
Matchless Qualities
THE Holy Scriptures reveal God’s
many wonderful qualities, enabling us
to get to know him. For instance, the
Scriptures tell us of God’s four main attributes—power, justice, wisdom, and
love. Let us consider each of them.

God is mighty
in power

Limitless in Power
Jehovah told Abraham: “I am God
Almighty.” (Genesis 17:1) His power
is matchless, limitless, and inexhaustible. By his power, God created the entire universe.

God never misuses his power. He always uses it in a controlled and purposeful way. He perfectly balances his
use of power with his justice, wisdom,
and love.
Jehovah generously uses his power
in behalf of his faithful servants. “His
eyes are roving about through all the
earth to show his strength in behalf of
those whose heart is complete toward
him.” (2 Chronicles 16:9) Are you not
drawn to this powerful yet caring God?
A God of Justice
“Jehovah is a lover of justice.”
(Psalm 37:28) He always does what is
right and fair according to his own perfect standard.

God hates injustice. He “treats none
with partiality nor accepts a bribe.”
(Deuteronomy 10:17) He opposes
those who oppress others, and he acts
in behalf of the vulnerable, including
12

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

“any widow or fatherless boy.” (Exodus
22:22) God views all humans without
prejudice. “God is not partial, but in
every nation the man that fears him
and works righteousness is acceptable
to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
Jehovah’s justice is perfectly balanced. He is never too lenient, never
too harsh. He punishes unrepentant
wrongdoers but extends tender mercy to repentant ones. “Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and
abundant in loving-kindness. He will
not for all time keep ?nding fault, neither will he to time inde?nite keep resentful. He has not done to us even
according to our sins; nor according
to our errors has he brought upon us
what we deserve.” (Psalm 103:8-10)
God also remembers and rewards the
faithful acts of his loyal servants. Does
not the God of such justice merit your
trust?

A God of Wisdom
Jehovah is the Source of all wisdom. “O the
depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge!” (Romans 11:33) His wisdom is unrivaled and in?nite.

God’s wisdom is clearly seen in physical creation. “How many your works are, O Jehovah!”
exclaimed the psalmist. “All of them in wisdom
you have made.”—Psalm 104:24.
God’s wisdom is also revealed in the Holy
Scriptures. King David wrote: “The reminder
of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.” (Psalm 19:7) Just imagine
—you can draw on God’s boundless wisdom!
Will you take advantage of that opportunity?
“God Is Love”
Jehovah’s principal attribute is love. “God is
love,” the Scriptures tell us. (1 John 4:8) Love
motivates and guides all he does.

God shows his love for us in countless ways.
He gives us good things. “He did good, giving

The Holy Scriptures
contain God’s wisdom

God is impartial

God’s creative wisdom
inspires awe

Praying and
meditating on God’s
qualities will draw
you closer to him

you rains from heaven and fruitful
seasons, ?lling your hearts to the full
with food and good cheer.” (Acts 14:
17) Indeed, “every good gift and every
perfect present is from above, for it
comes down from the Father of the
celestial lights.” (James 1:17) Through
the priceless gift of the Scriptures, God
reveals the truth about himself and
teaches us his loving laws and principles. “Your word is truth,” said Jesus in
prayer.—John 17:17.
God also helps us in our trials.
“Throw your burden upon Jehovah
himself, and he himself will sustain

What Do You Think?
? Which of God’s qualities
especially appeals to you? Why?
? How can you draw close to
God?

you. Never will he allow the righteous
one to totter.” (Psalm 55:22) He forgives our sins. “You, O Jehovah, are
good and ready to forgive; and the
loving-kindness to all those calling
upon you is abundant.” (Psalm 86:5)
And he even o?ers us everlasting life.
“He will wipe out every tear from their
eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor
pain be anymore.” (Revelation 21:4)
How will you respond to God’s love?
Will you love him in return?
Draw Close to God
God wants you to know him well.
His Word urges you: “Draw close to
God, and he will draw close to you.”
(James 4:8) God called the faithful
prophet Abraham “my friend.” (Isaiah 41:8) Jehovah wants you to be his
friend too.

The more you learn about God, the
closer you will feel to him and the
happier you will be. “Happy is the
man” whose “delight is in the law of
Jehovah, and in his law he reads in an
undertone day and night.” (Psalm 1:
1, 2) Therefore, keep on studying the
Holy Scriptures. Meditate on God’s
qualities and works. Show your love
for God by applying what you learn.
“This is what the love of God means,
that we observe his commandments;
and yet his commandments are not
burdensome.” (1 John 5:3) Pray, then,
as did the psalmist: “Make me know
your own ways, O Jehovah; teach me
your own paths. Make me walk in your
truth.” (Psalm 25:4, 5) You will ?nd
that God “is not far o? from each one
of us.”—Acts 17:27.

6 What Is God’s Purpose
for the Earth?
GOD created the earth to be
mankind’s perfect home. His
Word states: “To Jehovah the heavens belong, but the earth he has given
to the sons of men.”—Psalm 115:16.
Before he created the ?rst man,
Adam, God chose one small part of the
earth called Eden and there planted a
beautiful garden. The Scriptures state
that the Euphrates and Tigris (Hiddekel) rivers had their source in Eden.1
The garden of Eden is thought to have
been located in what is now eastern
Turkey. Yes, the garden of Eden really
did exist on earth!
God created Adam and settled him
in the garden of Eden “to cultivate
it and to take care of it.” (Genesis 2:
15) Later, God created a wife for Adam
—Eve. God commanded the couple:
“Be fruitful and become many and
?ll the earth and subdue it.” (Genesis 1:28) Clearly, God “did not create
[the earth] simply for nothing, [but]
formed it even to be inhabited.”—Isaiah 45:18.
Adam and Eve, however, rebelled
against God by deliberately breaking
his law. God therefore put them out of
1 Genesis 2:10-14 says: “There was a river issuing
out of Eden to water the garden, and from there it began to be parted and it became, as it were, four heads.
The ?rst one’s name is Pishon . . . the name of the
second river is Gihon . . . the name of the third river
is Hiddekel [or, Tigris]; it is the one going to the east
of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.” The
location and identity of the ?rst two rivers are not
known.

the garden of Eden. Paradise was lost.
And the damage caused by Adam’s sin
went further. The Scriptures tell us:
“Through one man sin entered into
the world and death through sin,
and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned.”—Romans
5:12.
Did Jehovah abandon his original
purpose—that the earth be a paradise
inhabited by happy people? No! God
states: “My word that goes forth from
my mouth will . . . not return to me
without results, but it will certainly do
that in which I have delighted, and
it will have certain success in that for
which I have sent it.” (Isaiah 55:11)
Paradise will be restored on earth!
What will life in Paradise be like?
Consider the Scriptural promises
shown on the following two pages.

How Would You Answer?
? What was God’s original purpose
for the earth and man?
? How do we know that God will
fulfill that purpose?

15

The dead will be resurrected: “All those in the
memorial tombs will hear his voice and come
out.”—John 5:28, 29.

No more old age, infirmity, or
death: “No resident will say: ‘I
am sick.’ ” (Isaiah 33:24) God
“will wipe out every tear from
their eyes, and death will be
no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4.

Plenty of good food:
“The earth itself will certainly
give its produce; God, our God,
will bless us.”—Psalm 67:6.

A Coming Earthly Paradise
Fine homes and satisfying work: “They
will certainly build houses and have occupancy . . . The work of their own hands my
chosen ones will use to the full.”—Isaiah
65:21, 22.
No more war, crime, or violence:
Jehovah “is making wars to cease to
the extremity of the earth.” (Psalm
46:9) “The wicked . . . will be cut o?
from the very earth.”—Proverbs 2:22.

17

7 What God Promised
Through the Prophets
THE ancient prophets showed faith in
God. They believed his promises and
built their lives around them. What
did those promises include?
Immediately after Adam and Eve rebelled in Eden, God promised that he
would appoint someone to crush the
head of “the serpent,” representing
“the great dragon . . . , the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan,”
destroying him forever. (Genesis 3:14,
15; Revelation 12:9, 12) Who would
that Coming One prove to be?
Some 2,000 years after giving that
?rst prophecy, Jehovah promised the
prophet Abraham that the Coming
One would be a descendant of his. God
told Abraham: “By means of your seed
[or, o?spring] all nations of the earth
will certainly bless themselves due to

the fact that you have listened to my
voice.”—Genesis 22:18.
In 1473 B.C.E., God gave the prophet
Moses further information about the
“seed.” Moses told the children of Israel: “A prophet from your own midst,
from your brothers, like me, is what
Jehovah your God will raise up for you
—to him you people should listen.”
(Deuteronomy 18:15) The coming
prophet like Moses would thus come
from among the children of Abraham.
That prophet would also be a descendant of King David and would
himself become a great king. God
promised King David: “I shall certainly raise up your seed after you [and]
establish the throne of his kingdom
?rmly to time inde?nite.” (2 Samuel
7:12, 13) God also revealed that this

The promised “seed” would . . .

descend from
Abraham

18

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

be a prophet like
Moses

descendant of David would be called
“Prince of Peace,” adding: “To the
abundance of the princely rule and to
peace there will be no end, upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom in order to establish it ?rmly
and to sustain it by means of justice
and by means of righteousness, from
now on and to time inde?nite.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7) Yes, that righteous Leader
would restore global peace and justice.
But when would he arrive?

Did the Messiah, the prophet like
Moses and long-awaited “seed,” really
come in 29 C.E.? Let us see.

The angel Gabriel later told God’s
prophet Daniel: “You should know
and have the insight that from the
going forth of the word to restore
and to rebuild Jerusalem until Messiah the Leader, there will be seven
weeks, also sixty-two weeks.” (Daniel
9:25) Those were 69 weeks of years
—7 years each—that totaled 483 years.
They ran from 455 B.C.E. to 29 C.E.1

? What will the promised “seed”
of Abraham do to Satan?
? What did God promise through
Moses?
? What did David learn about the
“seed”?
? What did the angel Gabriel tell
Daniel?

How Would You Answer?

1 See pages 197-199 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

crush the
serpent, Satan

come in
David’s line

arrive in 29 C.E.

8 The Messiah
Appears
MORE than 500 years after Daniel
prophesied, God’s angel Gabriel appeared to a young virgin girl named
Mary, a descendant of King David.
“Good day, highly favored one,
Jehovah is with you,” Gabriel told her.
(Luke 1:28) Mary, however, was afraid.
What could Gabriel’s greeting mean?
“Have no fear, Mary, for you have
found favor with God; and, look!
you will conceive in your womb and
give birth to a son, and you are to call
his name Jesus,” Gabriel explained.
“Jehovah God will give him the throne
of David his father, and . . . there
will be no end of his kingdom.” (Luke
1:30-33) What wonderful news! Mary
would give birth to the Messiah, the
long-awaited “seed”!
The following year, Jesus was born
in Bethlehem. That night, an angel announced to local shepherds: “Look! I
am declaring to you good news of a
great joy . . . because there was born to
you today a Savior, who is Christ the
Lord, in David’s city.” (Luke 2:10, 11)
Later, Jesus’ family moved to Nazareth,
where he grew up.
In the year 29 C.E.—the very year
that the Messiah was due to appear—Jesus began serving as God’s
prophet, when he was “about thirty
years old.” (Luke 3:23) Many people
came to realize that he had been sent
by God. They said: “A great prophet
20

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

Gabriel told Mary that
she would give birth to
the Messiah

has been raised up among us.” (Luke 7:
16, 17) But what did Jesus teach?
Jesus taught people to love and worship God: He declared: “Jehovah our
God is one Jehovah, and you must love
Jehovah your God with your whole
heart and with your whole soul and
with your whole mind and with your
whole strength.” (Mark 12:29, 30)
He also said: “It is Jehovah your God
you must worship, and it is to him
alone you must render sacred service.”
—Luke 4:8.
Jesus urged people to love one another: “You must love your neighbor as
yourself,” he said. (Mark 12:31) He also
said: “All things . . . that you want men
to do to you, you also must likewise
do to them; this, in fact, is what the

Who Is Jesus, the Messiah?
“Messiah” and “Christ” both mean “Anointed One,” that is,
one appointed to a position by God. God gave life to Jesus,
the Messiah. By means of a great miracle, God caused Jesus
to be born to Mary without a human father.
Why did so many people put faith in Jesus? The following
are just a few reasons:
? He based his teachings on the Holy Scriptures.
? His teachings and his example attracted lovers of truth
and justice.
? He performed many miracles by means of God’s power.
? He ful?lled many prophecies recorded in the Holy
Scriptures.

Law and the Prophets mean.”—Matthew 7:12.
Jesus zealously told others about God’s
Kingdom: “I must declare the good
news of the kingdom of God, because
for this I was sent forth,” he stated.
(Luke 4:43) Why is God’s Kingdom so
important?

The Scriptures teach that God’s
Kingdom is a heavenly government
that will rule over the earth. Jesus, the
Messiah, is its God-appointed King.
The prophet Daniel foresaw that in
heaven God would give the Messiah
“rulership and dignity and kingdom.”
(Daniel 7:14) That Kingdom will establish Paradise earth wide and reward
God’s servants with everlasting life. Is
that not the best of news?

How Would You Answer?
? What did God’s angel Gabriel
tell Mary?
? What prophecy was ful?lled in
29 C.E?
? What did Jesus teach?
? What is God’s Kingdom, and
what will it accomplish?

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

21

9 Learning From Messiah
the Leader
GOD foretold that he would appoint
the Messiah as the Leader for all peoples. God knows what kind of leader we really need and chose the best
Leader possible. What sort of Leader
did the Messiah prove to be? A mighty
general? A skilled politician? A wise
philosopher? According to the Holy
Scriptures, the Messiah was a very special prophet—Jesus Christ.—Matthew
23:10.
God made sure that Jesus was born
perfect, holy. Further, Jesus resisted Satan’s every e?ort to corrupt him. In
word and deed, Jesus ?awlessly re?ected God’s perfect use of power, as well
as God’s justice, wisdom, and love.
Consider how we can learn from Jesus’
example.
He used his God-given power to help
others. Jesus really cared about people, and he generously used his power
to ?ll their needs. “I feel pity for the
crowd, because . . . they have nothing
to eat,” he said. (Mark 8:2) Then Jesus
miraculously fed the large crowds that
had come to hear him teach.
Jesus also traveled about, teaching
and “curing every sort of disease and
every sort of in?rmity among the people.” (Matthew 4:23) Understandably,
multitudes followed him, and “all the
crowd were seeking to touch him, because power was going out of him and
healing them all.” (Luke 6:19) Indeed,
22

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

Jesus came, “not to be ministered to,
but to minister, and to give his soul a
ransom in exchange for many.” (Matthew 20:28)1 How many human leaders show such a self-sacri?cing spirit?
He reflected God’s justice. Jesus adhered to the letter and the spirit of
God’s law. As the Scriptures had foretold, he said, in e?ect: “To do your
will, O my God, I have delighted, and
your law is within my inward parts.”
(Psalm 40:8) Jesus treated all—rich and
poor, male and female, children and
adults—with dignity, respect, and impartiality, as God does. Once, Jesus’
disciples reprimanded parents who
were bringing their children to Jesus.
But Jesus said: “Let the young children
come to me; do not try to stop them,
for the kingdom of God belongs to
suchlike ones.”—Mark 10:14.
He displayed divine wisdom. Jesus had
keen understanding of people. “He
himself knew what was in man.”
(John 2:25) When Jesus’ enemies sent
men to arrest him, even these acknowledged: “Never has another man
spoken like this.” Where did Jesus get
his wisdom? He explained: “What I
teach is not mine, but belongs to him
that sent me.”—John 7:16, 46.
He showed godly love. Jesus also had
tender compassion for people. A man
1 For a discussion of the ransom, see chapter 5 of
the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?

Jesus generously
helped others

who was “full of leprosy” begged him:
“Lord, if you just want to, you can
make me clean.” Moved with pity,
Jesus “stretched out his hand and
touched him, and said to him: ‘I want
to. Be made clean.’ And immediately
the leprosy vanished from him.” (Luke
5:12, 13; Mark 1:41, 42) Jesus truly desired to relieve that poor man’s su?ering.
Does Jesus care about you too? Jesus
himself answers: “Come to me, all you
who are toiling and loaded down, and
I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon
you and learn from me, for I am mildtempered and lowly in heart, and you
will ?nd refreshment for your souls.”
—Matthew 11:28, 29.
Jesus is the best Leader we could
possibly have. As such, he urges us:
“Learn from me.” Will you accept his
heartwarming invitation? Doing so
will lead to a happy life.

Jesus loved children

How Would You Answer?
? What position did God give
Jesus?
? What qualities did Jesus display?
Which qualities appeal most to
you?
? What invitation does Jesus extend to us?

Jesus compassionately
healed the sick

10 Exposing the Enemy
of Faith
LONG before Jehovah God made the
earth, he created angels in heaven. In
time, however, one angel began to desire the worship that rightly belongs
only to God. By acting on that desire,
he made himself Satan, meaning “Resister,” that is, one who resists God.
How did Satan act against God?
Satan tricked Eve into disobeying
God. Cunningly, he suggested that
Jehovah God was withholding something good by forbidding her to eat
from a particular tree. He brazenly called God a liar and implied that
Eve should reject God’s guidance,
saying: “God knows that in the very
day of your eating from it your eyes
are bound to be opened and you are
bound to be like God, knowing good
and bad.” (Genesis 3:5) Eve foolishly
believed Satan’s lies. She broke God’s
law and in?uenced Adam to do the
same. Ever since, Satan has been an
enemy of all those having real faith.
And he has continued to deceive people down to this day. How?
Corrupted Faith Spreads
Satan used idolatry and human traditions to corrupt the children of Israel. Jesus, the Messiah, told their religious leaders that because they taught
“commands of men as doctrines,”
their worship was in vain. (Matthew
15:9) When that nation rejected the
Messiah, God rejected them. Jesus told
24

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

them: “The kingdom of God will be
taken from you and be given to a nation producing its fruits.” (Matthew
21:43) Jesus’ followers then became
God’s favored people.
Satan next worked to corrupt Jesus’
followers. Did he succeed? Jesus foretold what would happen in a prophetic illustration. In the illustration, a
man sowed ?ne wheat in a ?eld. Later,
an enemy sowed weeds in among the
wheat. Both crops were left to grow
until harvesttime. Then the weeds
were separated from the wheat and destroyed. But the wheat was gathered
into the owner’s storehouse.
Jesus then explained to his disciples
what the illustration meant. He himself is the Sower. “As for the ?ne seed,”
he went on, “these are the sons of the
kingdom; but the weeds are the sons of
the wicked one, and the enemy that
sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is
a conclusion of a system of things, and
the reapers are angels.” (Matthew 13:
38, 39) Jesus likened his true disciples
to wheat. But Satan sowed false disciples, like weeds, in among these true
followers of Jesus. Thus, as Jesus himself foretold, during the centuries after his death, false disciples appeared.
These promoted apostate teachings,
such as the Trinity, the idea that there
are three persons in one God. The false
disciples also began to practice idola-

try and to meddle in politics. Only a few remained true to Jesus’ teachings.

Satan used a serpent
to mislead Eve

Real Faith Is Preserved
However, as Jesus explained, eventually a
change would occur. God’s angels would separate out those without real faith to be destroyed. Then, those having real faith would
be easier to identify. Finally, Satan the Devil,
the original enemy of faith, would also be destroyed. Yes, real faith would triumph!

But how can you identify people who have
real faith today? We will discuss the answer to
this question next.

How Would You Answer?
Satan has used idolatry
and human traditions
to mislead people

God’s angels are
searching for
people who desire
to have real faith

? Where did Satan come from?
? How has Satan tried to corrupt
faith?
? Explain Jesus’ illustration of
the wheat and the weeds.

11 Showing Real Faith
Today
MANY people today claim to have
faith. But Jesus taught that few people
would have real faith. He said: “Broad
and spacious is the road leading o?
into destruction, and many are the
ones going in through it; whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road
leading o? into life, and few are the
ones ?nding it.”—Matthew 7:13, 14.
How do people today show that
they have real faith? “By their fruits
you will recognize them,” Jesus said.
“Every good tree produces ?ne fruit,
but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit.” (Matthew 7:16, 17) Thus,
real faith produces “?ne fruit.” It motivates people to display godly qualities. How do they do so?
Make Proper Use of Power
People who have real faith use their
power and authority to honor God and
to bene?t others. Jesus taught: “Whoever wants to become great among
you must be your minister.” (Mark 10:
43) Similarly, men of faith are not tyrants, neither outside nor inside the
home. They cherish their wives, assign
them honor, and lovingly respond to
their needs. The Scriptures say: “You
husbands, keep on loving your wives
and do not be bitterly angry with
them.” (Colossians 3:19) “Husbands,
continue dwelling in like manner with
them according to knowledge, assigning them honor as to a weaker vessel,
26

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

the feminine one, since you are also
heirs with them of the undeserved favor of life, in order for your prayers not
to be hindered.”—1 Peter 3:7.
On the other hand, a wife who has
real faith “should have deep respect
for her husband.” (Ephesians 5:33)
Wives should “love their husbands”
and “love their children.” (Titus 2:4)
Fathers and mothers who have faith
spend time with their children and
teach them God’s laws and principles. In the home, workplace, and elsewhere, they treat others with dignity
and respect. They follow the Scriptural counsel: “In showing honor to
one another take the lead.”—Romans
12:10.
God’s servants observe the Scriptural injunction: “You are not to accept
a bribe.” (Exodus 23:8) They never
abuse their position for sel?sh gain.
Rather, they look for opportunities to
help others, especially those in need.
They heed the advice: “Do not forget
the doing of good and the sharing of
things with others, for with such sacri?ces God is well pleased.” (Hebrews
13:16) Therefore, they experience the
truth of Jesus’ words: “There is more
happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”—Acts 20:35.
Uphold Godly Justice
People of faith willingly obey God’s
laws, and for them “his command-

ments are not burdensome.” (1 John
5:3) They know that “the law of
Jehovah is perfect . . . The orders
from Jehovah are upright, causing the
heart to rejoice; the commandment
of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes
shine.”—Psalm 19:7, 8.
Real faith also moves them to reject all forms of prejudice. They do
not elevate one race, country, or social
class above another, but instead, they
imitate God. “God is not partial, but in
every nation the man that fears him
and works righteousness is acceptable
to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
Real faith moves people to “conduct
[themselves] honestly in all things.”
(Hebrews 13:18) A person who has
faith also avoids harmful gossip and
slander. About the sort of person
whom God approves, the psalmist David wrote: “He has not slandered with
his tongue. To his companion he has
done nothing bad.”—Psalm 15:3.
Reflect Godly Wisdom
Those who have real faith base their
beliefs solely on the Holy Scriptures. They believe that “all Scripture is inspired of God and bene?cial
for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2 Timothy 3:
16) In their relationships with others,
they re?ect “the wisdom from above,”
which is “chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy
and good fruits.” (James 3:17) They
shun ungodly traditions and spiritism
and “guard [themselves] from idols.”
—1 John 5:21.

Show Genuine Love
The prophet Moses said: “You must
love Jehovah your God with all your
heart and all your soul and all your vital force.” (Deuteronomy 6:5) People
of faith show that kind of love for God.
They respect God’s name, Jehovah.
They “give thanks to Jehovah” and
“call upon his name” in faith. (Psalm
105:1) God’s servants also heed his
command: “You must love your fellow
as yourself.” (Leviticus 19:18) They reject violence and strive to “be peaceable with all men.” (Romans 12:18)
Figuratively, they “beat their swords
into plowshares and their spears into
pruning shears.” (Isaiah 2:4) As a result, they “have love among [themselves]” and enjoy a global brotherhood. (John 13:35) Can you identify
such people today?

How Would You Answer?
? What identi?es people who
have real faith?
? How do people of faith re?ect
God’s qualities in regard to
power?
wisdom?
justice?
love?

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

27

12 Show That You Have
Real Faith!
GOD warns his servants to expect tests
of faith. His Word says: “Be watchful.
Your adversary, the Devil, walks about
like a roaring lion, seeking to devour
someone.” (1 Peter 5:8) How might Satan try to destroy your faith?
Satan may use others, even your
loved ones, to pressure you not to look
into the Holy Scriptures. In this regard, Jesus foretold: “A man’s enemies
will be persons of his own household.”
(Matthew 10:36) Well-meaning family members and friends may be unaware of the wonderful truths found
in God’s Word. Or they may fear what
others think. However, the Scriptures
say: “Trembling at men is what lays
a snare, but he that is trusting in
Jehovah will be protected.” (Proverbs
29:25) If you stop learning from the
Scriptures in order to please men, will
that please God? Certainly not! On the
other hand, when we show real faith,
God helps us. “We are not the sort that
shrink back to destruction, but the sort

that have faith to the preserving alive
of the soul.”—Hebrews 10:39.
Recall the experience of Dumas, related earlier. At ?rst, his wife mocked
him for his faith. But later she joined
him in learning from God’s Word.
Likewise, if you persevere in doing
what is right, you may in?uence your
friends and loved ones to do the same.
In many cases, an unbelieving family member has been “won without a
word through the . . . chaste conduct”
and “deep respect” of one who shows
real faith.—1 Peter 3:1, 2.
Satan also tries to make people think
they are too busy to study the Scriptures. He would like the pressures of
life—personal concerns and worries
about money—to “choke the word” in
your case so that your faith “becomes
unfruitful.” (Mark 4:19) Reject such a
shortsighted view! The Scriptures say:
“This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true
God, and of the one whom you sent

Associate with others
who have faith

Have you experienced
this kind of opposition?

Pray for God’s help

forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Yes,
continuing to learn more about God
and Jesus, the Messiah, is essential to
gaining everlasting life in Paradise!
Think of Moses, who was a member
of Egypt’s royal household. He could
have pursued wealth, fame, and power. Yet, Moses chose “to be ill-treated
with the people of God rather than
to have the temporary enjoyment of
sin.” Why? “He continued steadfast as
seeing the One who is invisible.” (Hebrews 11:24, 25, 27) Yes, Moses had
strong faith in God. He put God’s interests ahead of sel?sh pursuits, and
God blessed him richly. If you do the
same, God will bless you too.
Satan may try to prey on you in a
variety of ways. But you need not become his victim. God’s Word urges us:
“Oppose the Devil, and he will ?ee
from you.” (James 4:7) How can you
oppose him?
Keep studying the Holy Scriptures. Read
God’s Word every day. Study its teachings. Apply its counsel. By doing so,
you will “take up the complete suit of

armor from God,” with which you can
resist Satan’s attacks.—Ephesians 6:13.
Associate with people who have real
faith. Search out others who read,
study, and apply the Holy Scriptures.
Such ones “consider one another to
incite to love and ?ne works, . . . encouraging one another.” They will
help you to grow in faith.—Hebrews
10:24, 25.
Draw close to Jehovah. Pray for God’s
help, and trust in him. Never forget,
God wants to help you. “Throw all
your anxiety upon [God], because he
cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:6, 7) “God
is faithful, and he will not let you be
tempted beyond what you can bear,
but along with the temptation he will
also make the way out in order for you
to be able to endure it.”—1 Corinthians
10:13.

Satan taunts God, saying that no
one will continue to serve Him if it
means su?ering trials. But you have
the opportunity to prove that Satan is
a liar! “Be wise,” God says, “and make
my heart rejoice, that I may make a reply to him that is taunting me.” (Proverbs 27:11) Yes, be determined to show
that you have real faith!

How Would You Answer?
? How might Satan try to undermine your faith?
? How did Moses show real faith?
? How can you endure trials of
faith?
29

13 Real Faith Leads to
Everlasting Happiness
“THE righteous one—by means of
faith he will live,” say the Holy Scriptures. (Romans 1:17) These words contain a thrilling promise that involves
you. In what ways?
After completing his work on earth,
Jesus, the Messiah, ascended to heaven
to be with God. As his disciples looked
on, “he was lifted up and a cloud
caught him up from their vision.”
(Acts 1:9) In heaven, God appointed
him as a mighty heavenly King. In the
near future, Jesus, “the Son of man,”
will arrive “in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down
on his glorious throne. And all the nations will be gathered before him, and
he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the
sheep from the goats.” (Matthew 25:
31, 32) When will this occur?
The Holy Scriptures foretell a period of worldwide trouble that would be
the sign that the Messiah’s judgment
of the nations was imminent. Jesus explained what that sign would include:
“Nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; and there
will be great earthquakes, and in one
place after another pestilences and
food shortages; and there will be fearful sights.”—Luke 21:7, 10, 11.
Today, we can clearly see Jesus’
words being ful?lled. Soon, Jesus will
come to destroy the wicked. Finally,
even Satan will be destroyed! Earth
30

REAL FAITH—YOUR KEY TO A HAPPY LIFE

will become a global paradise. All people will live in peace with one another
and even with the animals. “The wolf
will actually reside for a while with the
male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and
the maned young lion and the well-fed
animal all together; and a mere little
boy will be leader over them. They will
not do any harm or cause any ruin.”
(Isaiah 11:6, 9) “No resident will say:
‘I am sick.’ . . . At that time the eyes
of the blind ones will be opened, and
the very ears of the deaf ones will be
unstopped.” (Isaiah 33:24; 35:5) Even
the dead will be resurrected. “Jehovah
will certainly wipe the tears from all
faces,” and “death will be no more,
neither will mourning nor outcry nor
pain be anymore.” (Isaiah 25:8; Revelation 21:4) God’s original purpose for
the earth will then be ful?lled. What a
wonderful prospect!
Keep Growing in Faith
What sort of people will God reward
with life in Paradise? People of faith
—real faith!

Remember that real faith is based
on accurate knowledge of God’s Word.
Therefore, continue to get to know
God and Jesus better!
Real faith is backed up by righteous
works. God’s Word states: “Faith without works is dead.” (James 2:26) By
doing such good works, you will re-

Today’s problems show
that the Messiah will
soon judge the nations

?ect God’s marvelous attributes—power, justice, wisdom, and love. Keep on
striving to develop these godly qualities!
Cultivating real faith will bring you
rich rewards. Indeed, it is your key to a
happy life—both now and on into an
everlasting future!

People of faith will enjoy
Paradise forever!

How Would You Answer?
? Where is Jesus now?
? How do we know that Jesus will
soon come to judge the nations?
? When Jesus arrives, what will
he do?
? How can you keep building your
faith?

Have You Ever Wondered?
? What is the truth about God?
? How can you make your family life happy?
? Why are there so many problems in the world?
? Why does God allow su?ering?
? What is God’s purpose for the earth?
? Where are the dead?
? How do angels a?ect us?
? How can you draw close to God?

Millions of people have found satisfying answers to these
questions by studying the Holy Scriptures. You can too.

s

rk-E
161109

If you would like further information, please visit www.jw.org
or contact the provider of this brochure.

