When
Someone
You Love
Dies...

Has someone you loved fallen
asleep in death?
Are you still grieving?
Do you need help in dealing
with your grief?
Is there hope for the dead?
If so, what is it?
How can we be sure?
In this brochure, such questions will
receive comforting answers from the Bible.
We invite you to read it carefully.
“It Can’t Be True!”
PAGE 3

Is It Normal to Feel This Way?
PAGE 7

How Can I Live With My Grief?
PAGE 14

How Can Others Help?
PAGE 20

A Sure Hope for the Dead
PAGE 26
5 1994, 2000, 2005
Watch Tower Bible and Tract So ciety of Pennsylvania
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract So ciety of New York, Inc.
Bro oklyn, New York, U.S.A.
Septemb er 2014 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide
Bible educational work supp orted by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations
are from the mo dern-language New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures—With References.
When Some one You Love Dies
English (we-E)
Made in the United States of America

“It Can’t Be True!”
A NEW YORK (U.S.A.) man relates: “My son
Jonathan was visiting friends a few miles
away. My wife, Valentina, didn’t like him
to go out there. She was always nervous about the traf?c. But he loved electronics, and his friends had a workshop where he could get practical experience. I was at
home in west Manhattan, New York.
My wife was away visiting her family in Puerto Rico. ‘Jonathan will be
back soon,’ I thought. Then the doorbell rang. ‘That’ll be him for sure.’ It
wasn’t. It was the police and paramedics. ‘Do you recognize this driver’s license?’ the police o?cer asked. ‘Yes,
that’s my son’s, Jonathan’s.’ ‘We’ve got bad news for you.
There’s been an accident, and . . . your son, . . . your son has
been killed.’ My ?rst reaction was, ‘It can’t be true!’ That
bombshell opened a wound in our hearts that is still healing, even years later.”

‘We’ve got bad news for you. There’s been an accident,
and . . . your son, . . . your son has been killed.’
A father in Barcelona (Spain) writes: “Back

dead. A cerebral hemorrhage had snu?ed out

in the Spain of the 1960’s, we were a happy
´
family. There were Mar ia, my wife, and our

his life.

three children, David, Paquito, and Isabel, aged

ago. Even so, the deep pain of that loss stays

13, 11, and 9 respectively.

with us to this day. There is no way that par-

“Paquito’s death took place over 30 years

“One day in March 1963, Paquito came home

ents can lose a child and not feel that they

from school complaining of severe head pains.

have lost something of themselves—regardless

We were ba?ed as to what could be the cause

of how much time passes or how many other

—but not for long. Three hours later he was

children they may have.”

4

When Someone You Love Dies

These two experiences, where parents lost

true! I don’t believe it.” Other reactions often

children, illustrate how deep and lasting the

follow, as we will see.—1 Corinthians 15:25, 26.

wound is when a child dies. How true the words

However, before we consider the feelings of

of a doctor who wrote: “The death of a child

grief, let us answer some important questions.

is usually more tragic and traumatic than the

Does death mean the end of that person? Is there

death of an older person because a child is the

any hope that we can see our loved ones again?

last person in the family expected to die. . . .

his early 60’s he began to have symptoms of a

There Is a Real Hope
The Bible writer Paul o?ered hope of relief from that “last enemy,” death. He wrote:
“Death is to be brought to nothing.” “The last
enemy to be abolished is death.” (1 Corinthians 15:26, The New English Bible) Why could
Paul be so sure of that? Because he had been
taught by one who had been raised from the
dead, Jesus Christ. (Acts 9:3-19) That is also
why Paul could write: “Since death is through
a man [Adam], resurrection of the dead is also
through a man [Jesus Christ]. For just as in
Adam all are dying, so also in the Christ all will
be made alive.”—1 Corinthians 15:21, 22.

heart problem. He tried to lead an active life.

Jesus was deeply grieved when he met a wid-

Then, one day in July 1988, he su?ered a mas-

ow of Nain and saw her dead son. The Bible ac-

sive heart attack and died. His loss was devas-

count tells us: “As [Jesus] got near the gate of

tating. I never even got to say good-bye. He was

the city [Nain], why, look! there was a dead

not just my husband. He was my best friend.

man being carried out, the only-begotten son

We had shared 40 years of life together. Now it

of his mother. Besides, she was a widow. A con-

seemed that I had to face a special loneliness.”

siderable crowd from the city was also with

The death of any child represents the loss of
future dreams, relationships [son, daughter-inlaw, grandchildren], experiences . . . that have
not yet been enjoyed.” And this sense of deep
loss can also apply to any woman who has lost
a baby through miscarriage.
A bereaved wife explains: “My husband, Russell, had served as a medical aide in the Paci?c
theater during World War II. He had seen and
survived some terrible battles. He came back to
the United States and to a more tranquil life. Later he served as a minister of God’s Word. In

These are just a few of the thousands of trag-

her. And when the Lord caught sight of her, he

edies that strike families throughout the world

was moved with pity for her, and he said to her:

every day. As most grieving persons will tell

‘Stop weeping.’ With that he approached and

you, when death takes your child, your hus-

touched the bier, and the bearers stood still,

band, your wife, your parent, your friend, it is

and he said: ‘Young man, I say to you, Get up!’

truly what the Christian writer Paul called it,

And the dead man sat up and started to speak,

“the last enemy.” Often the ?rst natural reaction

and he gave him to his mother. Now fear seized

to the dreadful news may be denial, “It can’t be

them all, and they began to glorify God, saying:

When Someone You Love Dies

5

‘A great prophet has been raised up among us,’

Therefore, Peter could write with utter con-

and, ‘God has turned his attention to his peo-

viction: “Blessed be the God and Father of our

ple.’ ” Notice how Jesus was moved with pity,

Lord Jesus Christ, for according to his great

so that he resurrected the widow’s son! Imag-

mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope

ine what that portends for the future!—Luke 7:

through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from

12-16.

the dead.”—1 Peter 1:3.

There, in front of eyewitnesses, Jesus per-

The apostle Paul expressed his con?dent

formed an unforgettable resurrection. It was

hope when he said: “I believe all the things

a token of the resurrection that he had al-

set forth in the Law and written in the Proph-

ready predicted some time prior to this event, a

ets; and I have hope toward God, which hope

restoration to life on

these men themselves also

earth under “a new heav-

entertain, that there is go-

en.” On that occasion Jesus had said: “Do not marve l a t t h is , be c a u se t h e
hour is coming in which
all those in the memorial
tombs will hear his voice
and come out.”—Revelation 21:1, 3, 4; John 5:28,
29; 2 Peter 3:13.
Other eyewitnesses to a
resurrection included Pe-

Questions to Ponder
What is a natural reaction
to the death of a loved one?
What did Jesus do for
a widow at Nain?

ing to be a resurrection of
both the righteous and the
u n r i g h t e o u s . ”—A c t s 2 4 :
14, 15.
Millions therefore can

What promise regarding
the dead did Jesus give?

have the solid hope of see-

Why could Peter and Paul
be sure that there would
be a resurrection?

again on earth but un-

What questions
deserve an answer?

ter, along with some oth-

ing their loved ones alive
der very di?erent circumstances. What will those
circumstances be? Further
details of the Bible-based

ers of the 12 who accompanied Jesus on his

hope for our lost loved ones will be discussed

travels. They actually heard the resurrected Je-

in the ?nal section of this brochure, entitled “A

sus speak by the Sea of Galilee. The account

Sure Hope for the Dead.”

tells us: “Jesus said to them: ‘Come, take your

But ?rst let us consider questions you may

breakfast.’ Not one of the disciples had the

have if you are grieving over the loss of a loved

courage to inquire of him: ‘Who are you?’ be-

one: Is it normal to grieve this way? How can I

cause they knew it was the Lord. Jesus came

live with my grief? What can others do to help

and took the bread and gave it to them, and the

me cope? How can I help others who are griev-

?sh likewise. This was now the third time that

ing? And principally, What does the Bible say

Jesus appeared to the disciples after his being

about a sure hope for the dead? Will I ever see

raised up from the dead.”—John 21:12-14.

my loved ones again? And where?

6

When Someone You Love Dies

Is It Normal to
Feel This Way?

A

BEREAVED person writes: “As a child in England, I was taught not to express
my feelings in public. I can remember my father, an ex-military man, say-

ing to me through clenched teeth, ‘Don’t you cry!’ when something had caused
me pain. I cannot recall whether my mother
ever kissed or hugged any of us kids (there
were four of us). I was 56 when I saw my father die. I felt a tremendous loss. Yet, at ?rst, I
was unable to weep.”

son Amnon. In fact, he “wept with a very
great weeping.” (2 Samuel 13:28-39) He even

In some cultures, people express their feelings openly. Whether they are happy or sad,
others know how they feel. On the other hand,
in some parts of the world, notably in northern Europe and Britain, people, especially men,
have been conditioned to hide their feelings,
to suppress their emotions, to keep a sti? upper lip and not wear their hearts on their
sleeves. But when you have su?ered the loss of
a dear one, is it somehow wrong to express
your grief? What does the Bible say?

king became disturbed and went up to the roof
chamber over the gateway and gave way to

Those Who Wept in the Bible
The Bible was written by Hebrews of the
eastern Mediterranean region, who were expressive people. It contains many examples
of individuals who openly showed their grief.
King David mourned the loss of his murdered

How did Jesus react to the death of his friend

When Someone You Love Dies

grieved at the loss of his treacherous son Absalom, who had tried to usurp the kingship.
The Bible account tells us: “Then [David] the

weeping; and this is what he said as he walked:
‘My son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom!
O that I might have died, I myself, instead of
you, Absalom my son, my son!’ ” (2 Samuel 18:
33) David mourned like any normal father.
And how many times have parents wished
they could have died in place of their children!
It seems so unnatural for a child to die before
a parent.
Lazarus? He wept on nearing his tomb. (John
11:30-38) Late r, Mary Magdale ne w ept as
she neared Jesus’ sepulcher. (John 20:11-16)
True, a Christian with an understanding of
the Bible’s resurrection hope does not grieve
7

inconsolably, as some do who do not have
a clear Bible basis for their beliefs regarding the condition of the dead. But as a human with normal feelings, the true Christian,
even with the hope of the resurrection, does
grieve and does mourn the loss of any loved
one.—1 Thessalonians 4:13, 14.

ings? What do counselors recommend? Their

To Weep or Not to Weep
What about our reactions today? Do you ?nd
it di?cult or embarrassing to show your feel-

not bottle up their feelings. Therefore, it is not

modern views often merely echo the Bible’s
ancient inspired wisdom. They say that we
should express our grief, not repress it. This reminds us of faithful men of old, such as Job,
David, and Jeremiah, whose expressions of
grief are found in the Bible. They certainly did
wise to cut yourself o? from people. (Proverbs
18:1) Of course, mourning is expressed in dif-

It is normal to grieve and weep when a loved one dies

8

When Someone You Love Dies

ferent ways in di?erent cultures, also depend-

The Grieving Process

ing on the prevalent religious beliefs.1
What if you feel like weeping? It is part of
human nature to weep. Recall again the occasion of Lazarus’ death, when Jesus “groaned in
the spirit and . . . gave way to tears.” (John 11:
33, 35) He thus showed that weeping is a normal reaction to the death of a loved one.
This is supported by the case of a mother,
Anne, who had lost her baby Rachel to SIDS
(Sudden Infant Death Syndrome). Her husband commented: “The surprising thing was
that neither Anne nor I cried at the funeral.
Everyone else was weeping.” To this, Anne responded: “Yes, but I have done plenty of crying for both of us. I think it really hit me a few
weeks after the tragedy, when I was ?nally
alone one day in the house. I cried all day long.
But I believe it helped me. I felt better for it. I
had to mourn the loss of my baby. I really
do believe that you should let grieving people

he word “process” does not imply that grief
has any ?xed schedule or program. Grief
reactions can overlap and take varying lengths
of time, depending on the individual. This list
is not complete. Other reactions may also be
manifested. The following are some of the
symptoms of grief that one might experience.

T

Early reactions: Initial shock; disbelief, denial;
emotional numbness; guilt feelings; anger.
Acute grief may include: Memory loss and
insomnia; extreme fatigue; abrupt changes
of mood; ?awed judgment and thinking; bouts
of crying; appetite changes, with resultant
weight loss or gain; a variety of symptoms of
disturbed health; lethargy; reduced work
capacity; hallucinations—feeling, hearing,
seeing the deceased; in the loss of a child,
irrational resentment of your spouse.
Leveling-o? period: Sadness with nostalgia;
more pleasant memories of the deceased, even
tinged with humor.

weep. Although it is a natural reaction for others to say, ‘Don’t cry,’ that doesn’t really help.”

How Some React

She had had ?ve miscarriages. Now she was

How have some reacted when desolated by

pregnant again. So when a car accident forced

the loss of a loved one? For example, consider

her to be hospitalized, she was understandably

Juanita. She knows how it feels to lose a baby.

worried. Two weeks later she went into labor

1 For example, the Yoruba people of Nigeria have a traditional belief in the reincarnation of the soul. So when a mother loses a child, there is intense grief but only for a short period, for
as a Yoruba refrain says: “It is the water that is spilled. The calabash is not broken.” According to the Yoruba, this means that
the water-bearing calabash, the mother, can bear another child
—perhaps a reincarnation of the dead one. Jehovah’s Witnesses
do not follow any traditions based on superstitions that spring
from the false ideas of the immortal soul and reincarnation,
which have no basis in the Bible.—Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; Ezekiel
18:4, 20.

—prematurely. Shortly afterward little Vanes-

When Someone You Love Dies

sa was born—weighing just over two pounds.
“I was so excited,” Juanita recalls. “I was ?nally a mother!”
But her happiness was short-lived. Four days
later Vanessa died. Recalls Juanita: “I felt so
empty. My motherhood was taken away from
9

Miscarriage and Stillbirth—Mothers Grieve
hough she already had other children, Monna
was eagerly looking forward to the birth of her
next child. Even before the birth, it was a baby she
“played with, talked to, and dreamed of.”
The bonding process between mother and unborn child was powerful. She continues: “Rachel
Anne was a baby who kicked books o? my belly,
kept me awake at night. I can still remember the
?rst little kicks, like gentle, loving nudges. Every
time she moved, I was ?lled with such a love. I
knew her so well that I knew when she was in
pain, when she was sick.”
Monna continues her account: “The doctor
wouldn’t believe me until it was too late. He told
me to stop worrying. I believe I felt her die. She
just suddenly turned over violently. The next day
she was dead.”
Monna’s experience is no isolated event.
According to authors Friedman and Gradstein,
in their book Surviving Pregnancy Loss,
about one million women a year in the
United States alone su?er an unsuccessful
pregnancy. Of course, the ?gure worldwide is much greater.
People often fail to realize that a
miscarriage or a stillbirth is a
tragedy for a woman and one
she remembers—perhaps
all her life. For example,
Veronica, now up in years,
recalls her miscarriages
and especially remembers
the stillborn baby that
was alive into the ninth
month and was born
weighing 13 pounds.

T

10

She carried it dead inside her for the last two
weeks. She said: “To give birth to a dead baby is a
terrible thing for a mother.”
The reactions of these frustrated mothers is not
always understood, even by other women. A woman who lost her child by miscarriage wrote: “What
I have learned in a most painful way was that before this happened to me, I really had no idea of
what my friends had to bear. I had been as insensitive and ignorant toward them as I now feel people are to me.”
Another problem for the grieving mother is the
impression that her husband may not feel the loss
as she does. One wife expressed it this way: “I was
totally disappointed in my husband at the time.
As far as he was concerned, there really was no
pregnancy. He could not experience the grief that I
was going through. He was very sympathetic to
my fears but not to my grief.”
This reaction is perhaps natural for a
husband—he does not undergo the same
physical and emotional bonding that his
pregnant wife does. Nevertheless, he
su?ers a loss. And it is vital
that husband and wife realize that they are su?ering together, although in di?erent ways. They should share
their grief. If the husband
hides it, his wife may think
he is insensitive. So share
your tears, thoughts, and
embraces. Show you need
each other as never before.
Yes, husbands, show your
empathy.

When Someone You Love Dies

me. I felt incomplete. It was painful to come
home to the room we had prepared for Vanessa and to look at the little undershirts I had
bought for her. For the next couple of months,
I relived the day of her birth. I didn’t want to
have anything to do with anyone.”
An extreme reaction? It may be hard for
others to understand, but those who, like Juanita, have gone through it explain that they
grieved for their baby just as they would for
someone who had lived for some time. Long
before a child is born, they say, it is loved by
its parents. There is a special bonding with the
mother. When that baby dies, the mother feels
that a real person has been lost. And that is
what others need to understand.

How Anger and Guilt Can A?ect You
An ot he r mo th e r e x p r e s se d he r f e e l in g s
when told that her six-year-old son had suddenly died because of a congenital heart problem. “I went through a series of reactions
—numbness, disbelief, guilt, and anger toward

The loss of a child is a terrible trauma
—genuine sympathy and empathy can
help the parents

my husband and the doctor for not realizing
Anger can be another symptom of grief. It

at the departed one because of the burdens
that his or her death brings upon the survivor.

may be anger at doctors and nurses, feel-

Some feel guilty because of anger—that is,

ing that they should have done more in car-

they may condemn themselves because they

ing for the deceased. Or it may be anger at

feel angry. Others blame themselves for their

friends and relatives who, it seems, say or do

loved one’s death. “He wouldn’t have died,”

the wrong thing. Some get angry at the depart-

they convince themselves, “if only I had made

ed one for neglecting his health. Stella recalls:

him go to the doctor sooner” or “made him see

“I remember being angry with my husband be-

another doctor” or “made him take better care

cause I knew it could have been di?erent. He

of his health.”

how serious his condition was.”

had been very sick, but he had ignored the doc-

For others the guilt goes beyond that, es-

tors’ warnings.” And sometimes there is anger

pe cially if their loved one died sudde nly,

When Someone You Love Dies

11

unexpectedly. They start recalling the times

active life together. It can mean the end of

when they had become angry at the departed

a whole life-style that they shared, of travel,

one or had argued with him. Or they may feel

work, entertainment, and interdependence.

that they were not really all that they should
have been to the deceased.

Eunice explains what happened when her
husband suddenly died of a heart attack. “For

The long grieving process of many mothers

the ?rst week, I was in a state of emotional

supports what many experts say, that the loss

numbness, as if I had stopped functioning. I

of a child leaves a permanent gap in the life of

could not even taste or smell. Yet, my sense of

the parents, particularly the mother.

logic continued in a detached way. Because I

When You Lose a Spouse
The loss of a marriage partner is another

had been with my husband while they were

kind of trauma, especially if both led a very

tion, I did not su?er the usual denial symp-

trying to stabilize him using CPR and medica-

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome—Facing the Grief
he sudden death of a baby is a devastating tragedy. One day an apparently normal, healthy
baby fails to wake up. This is totally unexpected,
for who imagines that any infant or child will die
before its parents do? A baby that has become the
center of a mother’s boundless love is suddenly the
focus of her boundless grief.
Guilt feelings begin to ?ood in. The parents may
feel responsible for the death, as if it were due to
some neglect. They ask themselves, ‘What could
we have done to prevent it?’1 In some cases the
husband, without foundation, might even unconsciously blame his wife. When he went to work,
the baby was alive and healthy. When he got home,
it had died in its crib! What was his wife doing?
Where was she at the time? These plaguing ques-

T

1 Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), which usually occurs in babies aged one to six months, is the term used when
healthy babies die suddenly without any explicable cause. In
some cases it is believed that the possibility can be avoided if the
baby is put to sleep on its back or side but not face down. However, no sleeping position will prevent every case of SIDS.

12

tions have to be cleared up so that they do not put a
strain on the marriage.
Unforeseen and unforeseeable circumstances
caused the tragedy. The Bible states: “I returned to
see under the sun that the swift do not have the
race, nor the mighty ones the battle, nor do the wise
also have the food, nor do the understanding ones
also have the riches, nor do even those having
knowledge have the favor; because time and unforeseen occurrence befall them all.”—Ecclesiastes 9:11.
How can others help when a family loses a baby?
One bereaved mother responded: “One friend came
and cleaned up my house without my having to say
a word. Others made meals for us. Some just helped
by giving me a hug—no words, just a hug. I didn’t
want to talk about it. I didn’t want to have to explain over and over again what had happened. I
didn’t need prying questions, as if I had failed to do
something. I was the mother; I would have done
anything to save my baby.”

When Someone You Love Dies

toms. Nevertheless, there was an intense feel-

about it. By trying to force yourself into a mold

ing of frustration, as if I was watching a car go

created by others or by society as a whole, you

over a cli? and there was nothing I could do

stunt your growth toward restored emotional

about it.”

health.”

Did she weep? “Of course I did, especially

Of course, di?erent people handle their grief

when I read the hundreds

in di?erent ways. We are

of sympathy cards I had
received. I cried with each
one. It helped me to face
up to the rest of the day.
But n othi ng cou ld h el p
when I was asked repeatedly how I felt. Obviously,
I was miserable.”
What helped Eunice to
live through her grief?
“W i t h o u t r e a l i z i n g i t , I
unconsciously made the
decision to go on with my
life,” she says. “However, what still hurts me is
when I remember that my
husband, who loved life
so much, is not here to enjoy it.”

“Don’t Let Others
Dictate . . .”
The authors of Leavetaking—When and How

not trying to suggest that

Questions to Ponder
How is the grieving
of some people a?ected
by their culture?
What examples do we
have in the Bible of those
who openly grieved?
How have some reacted
to the loss of a loved one?
How have you reacted
in similar circumstances?
What makes the loss of a spouse
a di?erent kind of experience?
How does the grieving process
work? Is it wrong to grieve?

one way is necessarily better than another for every
person. However, danger
ar i s e s w h e n s t a g n a t i o n
sets in, when the griefstricken person is unable
to become reconciled to
the reality of the situation.
Then help might be needed from compassionate
friends. The Bible says: “A
true companion is loving
all the time, and is a broth-

What are some aspects
of the grieving process?
(See box on page 9.)

er that is born for when

What special circumstances a?ect
parents in sudden infant death?
(See box on page 12.)

talk, and to weep.—Prov-

How are many mothers a?ected
by a miscarriage or a stillbirth?
(See box on page 10.)

there is distress.” So do not
be afraid to seek help, to
erbs 17:17.
Grief is a normal reaction to loss, and it is not
wrong for your grief to be
obvious to others. But fur-

to Say Goodbye advise: “Don’t let others dic-

ther questions need answers: ‘How can I live

tate how you should act or feel. The griev-

with my grief? Is it normal to experience feel-

ing process works di?erently with everyone.

ings of guilt and anger? How should I deal with

Others may think—and let you know that

these reactions? What can help me to endure

they think—you are grieving too much or

the loss and the grief?’ The next section will

not grieving enough. Forgive them and forget

answer those and other questions.

When Someone You Love Dies

13

How Can I Live
With My Grief?

“I

FELT a lot of pressure on me to hold in my feelings,” explains Mike in recalling
his father’s death. To Mike, suppressing his grief was the manly thing to

do. Yet he later realized that he was wrong. So when Mike’s friend
lost his grandfather, Mike knew what to do. He
says: “A couple of years ago, I would have patted him on the shoulder and said, ‘Be a man.’
Now I touched his arm and said, ‘Feel however

accurate information, lets you put your feel-

you have to feel. It will help you to deal with
it. If you want me to go, I’ll go. If you want me
to stay, I’ll stay. But don’t be afraid to feel.’ ”

loved one died suddenly or death came after a

MaryAnne also felt pressure to hold in her
feelings when her husband died. “I was so wor-

appears certain: Repressing your feelings can

ried about being a good example to others,” she
recalls, “that I did not permit myself the normal
feelings. But I eventually learned that trying to
be a pillar of strength for others wasn’t help-

is far healthier to release your grief. How? The

ing me. I began analyzing my situation and
saying, ‘Cry if you have to cry. Don’t try to be
too strong. Get it out of your system.’ ”

ings in proper perspective.
Of course, not everyone expresses grief in
the same way. And such factors as whether the
long illness might have a bearing on the emotional reaction of the survivors. But one thing
be harmful both physically and emotionally. It
Scriptures contain some practical advice.

Releasing Grief—How?
Talking can be a helpful release. Following the death of all ten of his children, as
well as some other personal tragedies, the an-

So both Mike and MaryAnne recommend: Let
yourself grieve! And they are correct. Why?

cient patriarch Job said: “My soul certainly

Because grieving is a necessary emotional release. Releasing your feelings can relieve the
pressure you are under. The natural expression

to [Hebrew, “loose”] my concern about my-

of emotions, if coupled with understanding and

strain his concern. He needed to let it loose; he

14

feels a loathing toward my life. I will give vent
self. I will speak in the bitterness of my soul!”
(Job 1:2, 18, 19; 10:1) Job could no longer re-

When Someone You Love Dies

had to “speak.” Similarly, the English drama-

larly, some ?nd it easier to express themselves

tist Shakespeare wrote in Macbeth: “Give sor-

in writing. One widow reported that she would

row words; the grief that does not speak whis-

write down her feelings and then days later

pers the o’er-fraught heart and bids it break.”

read over what she had written. She found this

So talking about your feelings to “a true

a helpful release.

companion” who will listen patiently and sym-

Whether by talking or writing, communi-

pathetically can bring a measure of relief.

cating your feelings can help you to release

(Proverbs 17:17) Putting experiences and feel-

your grief. It can also help to clear up mis-

ings into words often makes it easier to un-

understandings. A bereaved mother explains:

derstand them and to deal with them. And if

“My husband and I heard of other couples

the listener is another bereaved person who

that got divorced after losing a child, and we

has e?ectively dealt with his or her own loss,

didn’t wan t that to happ e n to u s. So an y

you may be able to glean

time we felt angry, want-

some practical suggestions

ing to blame each other, we

on how you can cope. When

would talk it out. I think we

her child died, one mother

really grew closer togeth-

explained why it helped to

er by doing that.” Thus, let-

talk to another woman who

ting your feelings be known

had faced a similar loss: “To

can help you to understand

know t hat so me bo dy e ls e

that even though you may

had gone through the same

be sharing the same loss,

thing, had come out whole

others may grieve di?erent-

from it, and that she was

ly—at their own pace and in

still surviving and ?nding

their own way.

some sort of order in her life
again was very strengthening to me.”
What if you are not com-

Bible examples show that
writing down your feelings
may help you to express
your grief

Something else that can
facilitate the release of grief
is crying. There is “a time to
weep,” says the Bible. (Ec-

fortable talking about your feelings? Follow-

clesiastes 3:1, 4) Surely the death of someone

ing the death of Saul and Jonathan, David

we love brings on such a time. Shedding tears

composed a highly emotional dirge in which

of grief appears to be a necessary part of the

he poured out his grief. This mournful com-

healing process.

position eventually became part of the writ-

One young woman explains how a close

ten record of the Bible book of Second Samuel.

friend helped her to cope when her mother

(2 Samuel 1:17-27; 2 Chronicles 35:25) Simi-

died. She recalls: “My friend was always there

When Someone You Love Dies

15

In every culture, grieving people appreciate receiving comfort
for me. She cried with me. She talked with
me. I could just be so open with my emotions,
and that was important to me. I didn’t have to
be embarrassed about crying.” (See Romans
12:15.) Nor should you feel ashamed of your
tears. As we have seen, the Bible is ?lled with
examples of men and women of faith—including Jesus Christ—who openly shed tears
of grief without any apparent embarrassment.
—Genesis 50:3; 2 Samuel 1:11, 12; John 11:
33, 35.
You may ?nd that for a time your emotions
will be somewhat unpredictable. Tears may
?ow without much advance warning. One widow found that supermarket shopping (something she had often done with her husband)
could reduce her to tears, especially when, out
of habit, she reached for items that had been
her husband’s favorites. Be patient with yourself. And do not feel that you have to hold back
the tears. Remember, they are a natural and
necessary part of grieving.
16

Dealing With Guilt
As noted previously, some have feelings of
guilt after losing a loved one in death. This may
help to explain the acute grief of the faithful
man Jacob when he was led to believe that his
son Joseph had been killed by “a vicious wild
beast.” Jacob himself had sent Joseph out to
check on the welfare of his brothers. So Jacob
was likely plagued with guilt feelings, such as
‘Why did I send Joseph out alone? Why did I
send him out into an area abounding with wild
beasts?’—Genesis 37:33-35.
Perhaps you feel that some neglect on your
part contributed to your loved one’s death. Realizing that guilt—real or imagined—is a normal grief reaction can be helpful in itself. Here
again, do not necessarily keep such feelings to
yourself. Talking about how guilty you feel can
provide a much needed release.
Realize, though, that no matter how much
we love another person, we cannot control his
or her life, nor can we prevent “time and unWhen Someone You Love Dies

foreseen occurrence” from befalling those we

wipe the slate clean, should you not also for-

love. (Ecclesiastes 9:11) Besides, no doubt your

give yourself?—Proverbs 28:13; 1 John 1:9.

motives were not bad. For example, in not mak-

I came to realize that it was ridiculous to feel

Dealing With Anger
Do you also feel rather angry, perhaps at
doctors, nurses, friends, or even the one who
died? Realize that this too is a common reaction
to loss. Perhaps your anger is the natural accompaniment of the hurt you feel. One writer
said: “Only by becoming aware of the anger
—not acting on it but knowing you feel it—can
you be free of its destructive e?ect.”

that way. There was nothing wrong with send-

It may also help to express or share the an-

ing her with her father to run an errand. It was

ger. How? Certainly not in uncontrolled out-

just a terrible accident.”

bursts. The Bible warns that prolonged anger is

ing a doctor’s appointment sooner, did you intend for your loved one to get sick and die? Of
course not! Then are you really guilty of causing that one’s death? No.
One mother learned to deal with the guilt after her daughter died in a car accident. She explains: “I felt guilty that I had sent her out. But

‘But there are so many things I wish I had

dangerous. (Proverbs 14:29, 30) But you may

said or done,’ you may say. True, but who of us

?nd comfort in talking about it with an under-

can say that we have been the perfect father,

standing friend. And some ?nd that vigorous

mother, or child? The Bible reminds us: “We all

exercise when they are angry is a helpful re-

stumble many times. If anyone does not stum-

lease.—See also Ephesians 4:25, 26.

ble in word, this one is a perfect man.” (James

While it is important to be open and honest

3:2; Romans 5:12) So accept the fact that you

about your feelings, a word of caution is in

are not perfect. Dwelling upon all kinds of “if

order. There is a big di?erence between ex-

onlys” will not change anything, but it may

pressing your feelings and dumping them on

slow down your recovery.

others. There is no need to blame others for

If you have sound reasons to believe that
your guilt is real, not imagined, then consider the most important factor of all in allaying
guilt—God’s forgiveness. The Bible assures us:
“If errors were what you watch, O Jah, O Jehovah, who could stand? For there is the true for-

your anger and frustration. So be mindful of
talking out your feelings, but not in a hostile way. (Proverbs 18:21) There is one preeminent aid in coping with grief, and we will
now discuss it.

giveness with you.” (Psalm 130:3, 4) You can-

Help From God
The Bible assures us: “Jehovah is near to

not return to the past and change anything.

those that are broken at heart; and those who

You can, though, beg God’s forgiveness for past

are crushed in spirit he saves.” (Psalm 34:18)

mistakes. Then what? Well, if God promises to

Yes, more than anything else, a relationship

When Someone You Love Dies

17

Some Practical Suggestions

R

ely on friends: Do not hesitate to let others
help if they o?er to do so and you can really use
some assistance. Understand that it may be their
way of showing you how they feel; perhaps they
cannot ?nd the right words.—Proverbs 18:24.
Take care of your health: Grieving can wear you
out, especially in the beginning. Your body needs
su?cient rest, healthful exercise, and proper
nourishment more than ever. A periodic checkup
by your family doctor might be in order.
Postpone major decisions: If possible, wait for at
least some time until you are thinking more clearly
before you decide such things as whether to sell
your house or to change your job. (Proverbs 21:5)
One widow recalled that several days after her
husband died, she gave away many of his personal
possessions. Later, she realized that she had given
away mementos she treasured.
Be patient with yourself: Grief often lasts longer
than people in general realize. Yearly reminders
of the lost loved one may renew the pangs. Special
pictures, songs, or even smells can trigger the tears.
One scienti?c study of bereavement explained the
grief process as follows: “The bereaved may swing
dramatically and swiftly from one feeling state
to another, and avoidance of reminders of the
deceased may alternate with deliberate cultivation
of memories for some period of time.” Keep
Jehovah’s precious promises in mind.—Philippians
4:8, 9.
Make allowances for others: Try to be patient
with others. Realize that it is awkward for them.
Not knowing what to say, they may clumsily say
the wrong thing.—Colossians 3:12, 13.

18

Beware of using medication or alcohol to cope
with your grief: Any relief o?ered by drugs or
alcohol is temporary at best. Medication should be
taken only under a doctor’s supervision. But be
careful; many substances are addictive. In addition,
these may delay the grieving process. A pathologist
warns: “The tragedy has to be endured, su?ered
and eventually rationalised and to retard this
unduly by knocking out the [person] with drugs
may prolong or distort the process.” Lasting relief
will come through meditating on Jehovah’s grand
purposes.—Psalm 1:2; 119:97.
Get back into a regular routine:
You may have to push yourself at ?rst to go to
work, to go shopping, or to take care of other
responsibilities. But you may ?nd that the
structure of your normal routine will do you
a lot of good. Keep busy in Christian works.
—Compare 1 Corinthians 15:58.
Do not be afraid to let go of acute grief:
Strange as it may seem, some bereaved ones are
afraid to let go of the intense grief, believing that
it may indicate their love for the deceased one
is diminishing. That simply is not the case.
Letting go of the pain makes way for treasured
memories that will no doubt always remain
with you.—Ecclesiastes 3:1, 4.
Do not be unduly anxious: You may ?nd
yourself worrying, ‘What will become of me now?’
The Bible counsels to take one day at a time.
“Living more on a day-to-day basis really
helps me,” explains one widow. Jesus said to
his disciples: “Never be anxious about the next day,
for the next day will have its own anxieties.”
—Matthew 6:25-34.

When Someone You Love Dies

with God can help you to cope with the death

anything without her—the ?rst congregation

of someone you love. How? All the practical

meeting we went to, the ?rst convention we at-

suggestions o?ered thus far have been based

tended—we would pray for strength. When we

on or are in harmony with God’s Word, the Bi-

got up in the morning and the reality of it all

ble. Applying them can help you cope.

seemed unbearable, we would pray to Jehovah

In addition, do not underestimate the value

to help us. For some reason, it was really trau-

of prayer. The Bible urges us: “Throw your

matic for me to walk into the house by myself.

burden upon Jehovah himself, and he him-

And so every time I came home alone, I would

self will sustain you.” (Psalm 55:22) If talk-

just say a prayer to Jehovah to please help me
to maintain some sort of

ing out your feelings with

calm.” That faithful wom-

a sympathetic friend can
help, how much more will

Questions to Ponder

po u ri n g ou t y ou r h e a r t

Why is it important
to let yourself grieve?

to “the God of all comfort” help you!—2 Corinthians 1:3.
It is not that prayer
simply makes us feel better. The “Hearer of prayer”
promises to give holy spirit to his servants who sincerely ask for it. (Psalm
65:2; Luke 11:13) And
God’s holy spirit, or active

How can you release your grief?
How can the Scriptures
help you to deal with feelings
of guilt and anger?
In what way can a relationship
with God help you to cope with
the death of a loved one?
What are some practical
suggestions for coping
with grief?

an ?rmly and rightly believes that those prayers
made a di?erence. You too
may ?nd that in response
to your persistent prayers,
‘the peace of God that excels all thought will guard
your heart and your mental powers.’—Philippians
4:6, 7; Romans 12:12.
The help that God supplies does make a di?erence. The Christian apostle
Paul stated that God “com-

force, can equip you with
“power beyond what is normal” to go from one

forts us in all our tribulation, that we may be

day to the next. (2 Corinthians 4:7) Remember:

able to comfort those in any sort of tribulation.”

God can help his faithful servants to endure

True, divine help does not eliminate the pain,

any and every problem they may face.

but it can make it easier to bear. That does not

One woman who lost a child in death re-

mean that you will no longer cry or will forget

calls how the power of prayer helped her and

your loved one. But you can recover. And as you

her husband through their loss. “If we were

do, what you have experienced can make you

home at night and the grief just became insur-

more understanding and sympathetic in help-

mountable, we would pray together out loud,”

ing others to cope with a similar loss.—2 Co-

she explains. “The ?rst time we had to do

rinthians 1:4.

When Someone You Love Dies

19

How Can Others Help?

“I

F THERE’S anything I can do, just let me know.” This is what many of us say
to the newly bereaved friend or relative. Oh, we sincerely mean it. We would

do anything to help. But does the bereaved one call us and say: “I’ve thought of
something you can do to help me”? Not usual-

Listen patiently and sympathetically without

ly. Clearly, we may need to take some initiative

necessarily feeling that you have to provide

if we are truly to assist and comfort one who is

answers or solutions. Allow them to express

grieving.

whatever they want to share.

A Bible proverb says: “As apples of gold in

Provide reassurance: Assure them that

silver carvings is a word spoken at the right

they did all that was possible (or whatever

time for it.” (Proverbs 15:23; 25:11) There is

else you know to be true and positive). Re-

wisdom in knowing what to say and what not

assure them that what they are feeling—sad-

to say, what to do and what not to do. Here

ness, anger, guilt, or some other emotion—may

are a few Scriptural suggestions that some be-

not be at all uncommon. Tell them about oth-

reaved persons have found helpful.

ers you know of who successfully recovered

What to Do . . .
Listen: Be “swift about hearing,” says James
1:19. One of the most helpful things you can do
is to share the bereaved one’s pain by listening.
Some bereaved persons may need to talk about
their loved one who has died, about the accident or illness that caused the death, or about
their feelings since the death. So ask: “Would
you care to talk about it?” Let them decide. Recalling when his father died, one young man
said: “It really helped me when others asked
what happened and then really listened.”
20

from a similar loss. Such “pleasant sayings” are
“a healing to the bones,” says Proverbs 16:24.
—1 Thessalonians 5:11, 14.
Be available: Make yourself available, not
just for the ?rst few days when many friends
and relatives are present, but even months later when others have returned to their normal
routine. In this way you prove yourself to be
“a true companion,” the kind who stands by
a friend in a time of “distress.” (Proverbs 17:
17) “Our friends made sure that our evenings
were taken up so that we didn’t have to spend
When Someone You Love Dies

too much time at home alone,” explains Tere-

ed to watch the children? Do visiting friends

sea, whose child died in a car accident. “That

and relatives need a place to stay? Recent-

helped us cope with the empty feeling we had.”

ly bereaved persons are often so stunned that

For years afterward, anniversary dates, such

they do not even know what they need to

as the wedding anniversary or the date of the

do, let alone tell others how they may help.

death, can be a stressful time for the survivors.

So if you discern a genuine need, do not wait

Why not mark such dates on your calendar so

to be asked; take the initiative. (1 Corinthi-

that when they come around, you can make

ans 10:24; compa re 1 John 3:17, 18.) One

yourself available, if necessary, for sympathet-

woma n whose husband had died reca lled:

ic support?

“Ma ny sa id, ‘If ther e’s a nything I ca n do ,

Take appropriate initiative: Are there er-

let me know.’ But one friend did not a sk.

rands that need to be run? Is someone need-

She went right into the bedroom, stripped
the bed, and laundered the linens soiled from his death. Another
took a bucket, water, and cleaning supplies and scrubbed the rug
where my husband had vomited. A
few weeks later, one of the congregation elders came over in his
work clothes with his tools and
said, ‘I know there must be something that needs ?xing. What is it?’
How dear that man is to my heart
for repairing the door that was
hanging on a hinge and for ?xing an electrical ?xture!”—Compare James 1:27.
Be hospitable: “Do not forget
hospitality,” the Bible reminds us.
(Hebrews 13:2) Especially should
we remember to be hospitable to
those who are grieving. Instead of
a “come anytime” invitation, set a

If you discern a genuine need, do not wait to be
asked—take appropriate initiative
When Someone You Love Dies

date and time. If they refuse, do
not give up too easily. Some gentle
21

encouragement may be needed. Perhaps they
declined you r invitation b ecause they a r e
afraid of losing control of their emotions in
front of others. Or they may feel guilty about
enjoying a meal and fellowship at such a time.
Remember the hospitable woman Lydia mentioned in the Bible. After being invited to her
home, Luke says, “She just made us come.”
—Acts 16:15.
Be patient and understanding: Do not be
too surprised by what bereaved ones may say
at ?rst. Remember, they may be feeling angry and guilty. If emotional outbursts are directed at you, it will take insight and patience
on your part not to respond with irritation.
“Clothe yourselves with the tender a?ections of
compassion, kindness, lowliness of mind, mildness, and long-su?ering,” recommends the Bible.—Colossians 3:12, 13.
Write a letter: Often overlooked is the value
of a letter of condolence or a sympathy card. Its
advantage? Answers Cindy, who lost her mother to cancer: “One friend wrote me a nice letter.
That really helped because I could read it over
and over again.” Such a letter or card of encouragement may be composed “in few words,”
but it should give of your heart. (Hebrews 13:
22) It can say that you care and that you share
a special memory about the deceased, or it can
show how your life was touched by the person
who died.
Pray with them: Do not underestimate the
value of your prayers with and for bereaved
ones. The Bible says: “A righteous man’s supplication . . . has much force.” (James 5:16) For
example, hearing you pray in their behalf can
22

help them allay such negative feelings as guilt.
—Compare James 5:13-15.

What Not to Do . . .
Do not keep away because you do not
know what to say or do: ‘I’m sure they need
to be alone right now,’ we may tell ourselves.
But perhaps the truth is that we are keeping
away because we are afraid of saying or doing the wrong thing. However, being avoided
by friends, relatives, or fellow believers may
only make the bereaved one feel lonelier, adding to the pain. Remember, the kindest words
and actions are often the simplest. (Ephesians
4:32) Your presence alone can be a source of
encouragement. (Compare Acts 28:15.) Recalling the day her daughter died, Teresea says:
“Within an hour, the lobby of the hospital was
?lled with our friends; all the elders and their
wives were there. Some of the women were in
hair curlers, some were in their work clothes.
They just dropped everything and came. A lot
of them told us that they didn’t know what to
say, but it didn’t matter because they were just
there.”
Do not pressure them to stop grieving:
‘There, there, now, don’t cry,’ we may want to
say. But it may be better to let the tears ?ow. “I
think it’s important to allow bereaved ones to
show their emotion and really get it out,” says
Katherine, re?ecting on her husband’s death.
Resist the tendency to tell others how they
should feel. And do not assume that you have
to hide your feelings in order to protect theirs.
Instead, “weep with people who weep,” recommends the Bible.—Romans 12:15.
When Someone You Love Dies

Your presence at the hospital can encourage the bereaved
Do not be quick to advise them to discard

of the patriarch Jacob’s reaction when he was

clothing or other personal e?ects of the de-

led to believe that his young son Joseph had

ceased before they are ready: We may feel

been killed by a wild animal. After Joseph’s

that it would be better for them to discard

blood-stained long garment was presented to

memory-evoking objects because they some-

Jacob, he “carried on mourning over his son

how prolong the grief. But the saying “Out of

for many days. And all his sons and all his

sight, out of mind” may not apply here. The

daughters kept rising up to comfort him, but

bereaved person may need to let go of the de-

he kept refusing to take comfort.”—Genesis

ceased slowly. Recall the Bible’s description

37:31-35.

When Someone You Love Dies

23

Do not say, ‘You can have another baby’:

feel sad or that the loss was not signi?cant.

“I resented people telling me I could have an-

However, they may be feeling very sad because

other child,” recalls a mother who lost a child

they dearly miss their loved one.

in death. They may mean well, but to the griev-

It may be better not to say, ‘I know how

ing parent, words to the e?ect that the lost

you feel’: Do you really? For example, can you

child can be replaced can ‘stab like a sword.’

possibly know what a parent feels when a child

(Proverbs 12:18) One child can never replace

dies if you have not experienced such a loss

another. Why? Because each is unique.

yourself? And even if you have, realize that

Do not necessarily avoid mentioning the

others may not feel precisely as you felt. (Com-

departed one: “A lot of people wouldn’t

pare Lamentations 1:12.) On the other hand, if
it seems appropriate, there

even mention my son Jim-

ma y b e so m e be n e? t i n

my’s name or talk about
him,” recalls one mother.

Questions to Ponder

telling how you recovered

“I must admit I felt a little hurt when others did

Why is it helpful to share the
bereaved one’s pain by listening?

from the loss of your loved
one. One woma n whose

that.” So do not necessarily change the subject
when the deceased one’s
name is mentioned. Ask
the person whether he
needs to talk about his

daughter had been killed
found it reassuring when

What are some things we
can do in order to comfort
one who is grieving?

the mother of another girl
who had died told of her

What should we avoid
saying or doing to someone
who is mourning?

own return to normal living. She said: “The dead
girl’s mother didn’t pref-

loved one. (Compare Job
1:18, 19 and 10:1.) Some bereaved persons ap-

ace her story with ‘I know how you feel.’ She

preciate hearing friends tell of the special qual-

simply told me how things were for her and let

ities that endeared the departed one to them.

me relate to them.”

—Compare Acts 9:36-39.

Helping a bereaved person calls for compas-

Do not be too quick to say, ‘It was for

sion, discernment, and much love on your part.

the best’: Trying to ?nd something positive

Do not wait for the bereaved one to come to

about the death is not always ‘consoling to de-

you. Do not simply say, “If there’s anything I

pressed souls’ who are grieving. (1 Thessalo-

can do . . .” Find that “anything” yourself, and

nians 5:14) Recalling when her mother died,

then take the appropriate initiative.

one young woman said: “Others would say,

A few questions remain: What about the Bi-

‘She’s not su?ering’ or, ‘At least she’s in peace.’

ble’s hope of a resurrection? What can it mean

But I didn’t want to hear that.” Such comments

for you and your loved one who has died? How

may imply to the survivors that they should not

can we be sure that it is a reliable hope?

24

When Someone You Love Dies

Helping Children Deal With Death

W

hen death strikes a family, parents as well
as other relatives and friends are often at a
loss as to what to say or do to help children cope
with what has happened. Yet, children need adults
to help them deal with death. Consider some
commonly asked questions about helping children
understand death.

reinforce the child’s feeling of abandonment and
he may reason: ‘Grandma left, and she didn’t even
say good-bye!’ Be careful, too, with young children,
about saying that the departed one has gone to
sleep. Children tend to be very literal. If a child
equates sleep with death, a fear of going to bed at
night can result.

How do you explain death to children? It is
important to explain matters in simple terms. Keep
it truthful too. Do not hesitate to use the real words,
such as “dead” and “death.” For example, you might
sit down with the child, take him in your arms, and
say: “A very, very sad thing has happened. Daddy
got very sick with a disease that not many people
get [or whatever you know to be true], and he died.
It isn’t anybody’s fault that he died. We’ll miss him
very much because we loved him, and he loved us.”
However, it may be helpful to explain that the child
or his surviving parent is not likely to die simply
because that one gets sick at times.

Should children attend the funeral services?
Parents should take into account the children’s
feelings. If they do not want to go, do not force
them or in any way make them feel guilty for not
going. If they want to go, give them a detailed
description of what will take place, including
whether there will be a casket and whether it will
be open or closed. Explain, too, that they may see
a lot of people crying because they are sad. Again,
let them ask questions. And reassure them that
they can leave if they need to.

Encourage their questions. ‘What’s dead?’ they
may ask. You might answer this way: “ ‘Dead’
means that the body stopped working and can’t do
any of the things it used to—it can’t talk, see, or
hear, and it can’t feel anything.” A parent who
believes the Bible’s promise of a resurrection can
use this opportunity to explain that Jehovah God
remembers the departed one and can bring him
back to life in the future earthly Paradise. (Luke
23:43; John 5:28, 29)—See the section “A Sure
Hope for the Dead.”
Is there anything you should not say? It is not
helpful to say that the deceased has gone on a long
journey. Fear of abandonment is a major concern
for a child, especially when a parent has died. To be
told that the deceased has gone on a trip may only

When Someone You Love Dies

How do children react to death? Children often
feel responsible for the death of a loved one.
Because a child may at one time or another have
felt angry at the person who died, the child may
come to believe that angry thoughts or words
caused the death. You might need to o?er some
comfort: ‘Your thoughts and words are not what
make people sick, and they don’t make people
die.’ A young child may need such reassurances
repeatedly.
Should you hide your grief from children?
Crying in front of children is both normal and
healthy. Besides, it is almost impossible to hide your
feelings from children completely; they tend to be
very discerning and can often sense that something
is wrong. Being honest about your grief lets them
know that it is normal to grieve and at times to
show your feelings.

25

A Sure Hope
for the Dead

A

25-year-old woman wrote: “In 1981 my adoptive mother died of cancer.
Her death was very hard on me and my adoptive brother. I was 17, and my

brother was 11. I missed her so much. Having been taught that she was in
heaven, well, I wanted to take my own life to
be with her. She was my best friend.”
It seems so unfair that death should have the
power to take away someone you love. And
when it happens, the thought of never again
being able to talk to, laugh with, or hold your
loved one can be most di?cult to bear. That
pain is not necessarily erased by being told that
your loved one is up in heaven.

prospect of enjoying perfect health, and they
will never have to die again. ‘But surely that is
wishful thinking!’ some may say.
What would it take to convince you that this
is a sure hope? To believe in a promise, you
would need to be certain that the one making
the promise is both willing and able to ful?ll it.
Who, then, is it that promises that the dead will
live again?

The Bible, however, holds out a much dif-

In the spring of 31 C.E., Jesus Christ boldly

ferent hope. As we have previously noted, the

promised: “Just as the Father raises the dead up
and makes them alive, so the Son also makes
those alive whom he wants to. Do not marvel
at this, because the hour is coming in which all

Scriptures indicate that it is possible to be reunited with your dead loved one in the near

Jesus’ tender feelings when resurrecting
Lazarus reflected his intense desire to
undo the ravages of death

those in the memorial tombs will hear his [Jesus’] voice and come out.” (John 5:21, 28, 29)
Yes, Jesus Christ promised that millions now
dead will live again on this earth and have

future, not in an unknown heaven but right
here on earth under peaceful, righteous condi-

the prospect of remaining on it forever under
peaceful, paradisaic conditions. (Luke 23:43;
John 3:16; 17:3; compare Psalm 37:29 and Mat-

tions. And at that time humans will have the

thew 5:5.) Since Jesus made the promise, it is

When Someone You Love Dies

27

safe to assume that he is willing to ful?ll it. But

Texts That Comfort

is he able to do so?
Less than two years after making that prom-

ime and again, in explaining how they have
coped with their grief, faithful Christians
have said: “Let me tell you my favorite Bible
text.” If you are grieving, maybe some of these
scriptures will also help you.

T

“Blessed be . . . the Father of tender mercies
and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in
all our tribulation.”—2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.

ise, Jesus demonstrated in a powerful way that
he is both willing and able to perform the resurrection.

“Lazarus, Come On Out!”
It was a touching scene. Lazarus was gravely
ill. His two sisters, Mary and Martha, sent word
to Jesus, who was across the Jordan River: “Lord,

“You are opening your hand and satisfying
the desire of every living thing.”—Psalm
145:16.

see! the one for whom you have a?ection is sick.”

“He [God] has set a day in which he purposes
to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by
a man whom he has appointed, and he has
furnished a guarantee to all men in that he
has resurrected him from the dead.”—Acts
17:31.

riously, instead of going to Bethany immediate-

“I—I myself am the One that is comforting
you people.”—Isaiah 51:12.

about it. By the time Jesus ?nally arrived in Beth-

“Like a man whom his own mother keeps
comforting, so I myself shall keep comforting
you people.”—Isaiah 66:13.

(John 11:17, 39) Could Jesus bring back to life

“This is my comfort in my a?iction, for your
own saying has preserved me alive. I have
remembered your judicial decisions from time
inde?nite, O Jehovah, and I ?nd comfort for
myself. May your loving-kindness serve, please,
to comfort me, according to your saying to your
servant.”—Psalm 119:50, 52, 76.

woman of action, ran out to meet him. (Compare

“The hour is coming in which all those in the
memorial tombs will hear his voice and come
out, those who did good things to a resurrection
of life.”—John 5:28, 29.

(John 11:3) They knew that Jesus loved Lazarus.
Would not Jesus want to see his sick friend? Culy, Jesus stayed where he was for the next two
days.—John 11:5, 6.
Lazarus died some time after the message
about his sickness was sent. Jesus knew when
Lazarus died, and he intended to do something
any, his dear friend had been dead four days.
someone who had been dead that long?
On hearing that Jesus was coming, Martha, a
Luke 10:38-42.) Touched by her sorrow, Jesus
assured her: “Your brother will rise.” When she
indicated her faith in a future resurrection, Jesus
plainly told her: “I am the resurrection and the
life. He that exercises faith in me, even though
he dies, will come to life.”—John 11:20-25.
Upon arriving at the tomb, Jesus directed that
the stone closing its entrance be taken away.
Then, after praying aloud, he commanded: “Lazarus, come on out!”—John 11:38-43.

28

When Someone You Love Dies

All eyes were ?xed on the tomb. Then, out
of the darkness, a ?gure emerged. His feet and
hands were bound with wrappings, and his face
was bound with a cloth. “Loose him and let him
go,” ordered Jesus. The last of the unraveled bandages fell to the ground. Yes, it was Lazarus, the
man who had been dead four days!—John 11:44.

Did It Really Happen?
The account of the raising of Lazarus is presented in the Gospel of John as a historical fact.
The details are too vivid for it to be a mere allegory. To question its historicity is to question all
the miracles of the Bible, including the resurrection of Jesus Christ himself. And to deny the resurrection of Jesus is to deny the Christian faith as
a whole.—1 Corinthians 15:13-15.
Actually, if you accept the existence of God,
you should have no problem believing in the resurrection. To illustrate: A person can videotape
his last will and testament, and after he dies, his
relatives and friends can see and hear him, in effect, as he explains how his estate is to be handled. A hundred years ago, such a thing was
unthinkable. And to some people now living in
remote parts of the world, the technology of video recording is so beyond comprehension as to
seem miraculous. If scienti?c principles established by the Creator can be used by humans
to reconstruct such a visible and audible scene,
should not the Creator be able to do far more? Is
it not reasonable, then, that the One who created life is capable of re-creating it?
The miracle of Lazarus’ restoration to life
served to increase faith in Jesus and the resurrection. (John 11:41, 42; 12:9-11, 17-19) In a
touching way, it also reveals the willingness and
When Someone You Love Dies

desire of Jehovah and his Son to perform the resurrection.

‘God Will Have a Yearning’
The response of Jesus to Lazarus’ death reveals a very tender side of the Son of God. His
deep feelings on this occasion clearly indicate his
intense desire to resurrect the dead. We read:
“Mary, when she arrived where Jesus was and
caught sight of him, fell at his feet, saying to
him: ‘Lord, if you had been here, my brother
would not have died.’ Jesus, therefore, when he
saw her weeping and the Jews that came with
her weeping, groaned in the spirit and became
troubled; and he said: ‘Where have you laid him?’
They said to him: ‘Lord, come and see.’ Jesus gave
way to tears. Therefore the Jews began to say:
‘See, what a?ection he used to have for him!’ ”
—John 11:32-36.
Jesus’ heartfelt compassion is here indicated
by three expressions: “groaned,” “became troubled,” and “gave way to tears.” The originallanguage words used in recording this touching
scene indicate that Jesus was so deeply moved by
the death of his dear friend Lazarus and the sight
of Lazarus’ sister weeping that His eyes brimmed
over with tears.1
What is so remarkable is that Jesus had previously brought two others back to life. And he fully intended to do the same with Lazarus. (John
1 The Greek word rendered “groaned” is from a verb (em·brima1o·mai) that signi?es to be painfully, or deeply, moved. One
Bible scholar notes: “Here it can only mean that such deep emotion seized Jesus that an involuntary groan was wrung from His
heart.” The expression translated “troubled” comes from a Greek
word (ta·ras1so) that indicates agitation. According to a lexicographer, it means “to cause one inward commotion, . . . to affect with great pain or sorrow.” The expression “gave way to
tears” comes from a Greek verb (da·kry1o) that means “to shed
tears, weep silently.”

29

11:11, 23, 25) Yet, he “gave way to tears.” Restoring humans to life, then, is not a mere procedure for Jesus. His tender and deep feelings as
manifested on this occasion clearly indicate his

The resurrection, based on
the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus,
will bring joy to all the nations

intense desire to undo the ravages of death.
Since Jesus is ‘the exact representation of Je-

?ed Jesus Christ. (Genesis 2:7-9; Matthew 6:10;

hovah God’s very being,’ we rightly expect no

Luke 23:42, 43) In that restored Paradise, the

less of our heavenly Father. (Hebrews 1:3) Of Je-

human family will have the prospect of enjoying

hovah’s own willingness to perform the resur-

life without end, free from all sickness and dis-

rection, the faithful man Job said: “If an able-

ease. (Revelation 21:1-4; compare Job 33:25; Isa-

bodied man dies can he live again? . . . You

iah 35:5-7.) Gone, too, will be all hatred, racial

will call, and I myself shall answer you. For the

prejudice, ethnic violence, and economic oppres-

work of your hands you will have a yearn-

sion. It will be into such a cleansed earth that
Jehovah God through Je-

ing.” (Job 14:14, 15) Here

sus Christ will resurrect the

the original-language word
that is rendered “you will
have a yearning” denotes
God’s earnest longing and
desire. (Genesis 31:30;

Questions to Ponder
When his friend Lazarus died,
how did Jesus demonstrate that
He is both willing and able
to perform the resurrection?

Psalm 84:2) Clearly, Jehovah must keenly anticipate
the resurrection.
Can we really believe the
resurrection promise? Yes,
there is no doubt that Jehovah and his Son are both
willing and able to ful?ll

dead.

That is now the hope
of the Christian woman
mentioned at the beginning of this section. Sev-

Why can we accept the Bible’s
account of the resurrection
of Lazarus as a historical fact?
How does the account in John
chapter 11 reveal Jesus’ intense
desire to undo the ravages of death?
What shows that Jehovah God
keenly anticipates the resurrection?

it. What does this mean for
you? You have the prospect of being reunited
with dead loved ones right here on earth but under very di?erent conditions!

eral

years

after

her

mother died, Jehovah’s
Witnesses helped her to
make a careful study of
the Bible. She recalls: “After learning about the resurrection hope, I cried. It
was wonderful to know

that I will see my mother again.”
If your heart similarly yearns to see a loved
one again, Jehovah’s Witnesses will gladly as-

Jehovah God, who started mankind o? in a

sist you to learn how you can make this sure

lovely garden, has promised to restore Para-

hope your very own. Why not contact them

dise on this earth under the rule of His heav-

at a Kingdom Hall near you, or write to the

enly Kingdom in the hands of the now glori-

nearest address listed on page 32.

30

When Someone You Love Dies

s

we-E
141117

Visit www.jw.org, or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses
for more information.

