Teach Your Children

Teach Your Children

“

You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart
and all your soul and all your strength. These words
that I am commanding you today must be on your
heart, and you must inculcate them in your sons
and speak of them when you sit in your house and
when you walk on the road and when you lie

”

down and when you get up.
—DEUTERONOMY 6:5-7.

Table of Contents
LESSONPAGE

1

A Secret That We Are Happy to Know ....................................... 4

2

Rebekah Wanted to Make Jehovah Happy................................ 6

3

Rahab Believed in Jehovah ....................................................... 8

4

She Made Her Father and Jehovah Happy ................................ 10

5

Samuel Kept Doing What Was Right ........................................ 12

6

David Was Not Afraid ............................................................... 14

7

Do You Ever Feel Lonely and Afraid? ........................................ 16

8

Josiah Had Good Friends .......................................................... 18

9

Jeremiah Did Not Stop Speaking About Jehovah ...................... 20

10

Jesus Always Obeyed ................................................................ 22

11

They Wrote About Jesus ........................................................... 24

12

Paul’s Nephew Was Brave ........................................................ 26

13

Timothy Wanted to Help People .............................................. 28

14

A Kingdom That Will Rule the Whole Earth .............................. 30

3

1

A Secret That We Are
Happy to Know

Has anyone ever told you a secret?—
The Bible talks about a special secret
called “the sacred secret.” It is sacred
because it is from God. And it is called
a secret because people did not know
about it. Even angels wanted to know
more about this. Would you like to
know what the secret is?—
A long, long time ago, God created
the ?rst man and woman. Their names
were Adam and Eve. God gave them
a beautiful home called the garden of
Eden. If Adam and Eve had obeyed God,
they and their children could have made
Throughout these stories, you will see a mark like this
(—) following some questions. This is a good time to pause
and let your child answer.

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Mark 4:11
1 Peter 1:12
Genesis 1:26-28; 2:8, 9; 3:6, 23
Matthew 6:9, 10
Psalm 37:11, 29

4

the whole earth a paradise like that garden. And they could have lived in Paradise forever. But do you remember
what Adam and Eve did?—
Adam and Eve disobeyed God, and
that is why we do not live in a paradise
today. But God said that he would make
the whole earth beautiful, and everyone
would live forever and be happy. How
would he do this? For a long time, people did not know. It was a secret.
When Jesus came to earth, he taught
people more about this secret. He said
that it was about God’s Kingdom. Jesus
told people to pray for this Kingdom to
come. It will make the earth a beautiful
paradise.
Are you excited to know this secret?— Remember that only those who
obey Jehovah will live in Paradise. The
Bible tells us many stories of men and
women who obeyed Jehovah. Would
you like to learn about them?— Let’s
see who some of them were and how we
can be like them.

What do you think the angels were trying to ?nd out?

QUESTIONS:

Why is the earth not a paradise today?
What special secret does the Bible talk about?
What did Jesus teach people about this secret?
What do you have to do to live in Paradise?
5

2

Rebekah Wanted to
Make Jehovah Happy

Rebekah was a woman who loved Jehovah. Her husband’s name was Isaac. He
also loved Jehovah. How did Rebekah
meet Isaac? How did she show that she
wanted to make Jehovah happy? Let’s
learn more about her.
Isaac’s parents were Abraham and Sarah. They lived in the land of Canaan,
where the people did not worship Jehovah. But Abraham wanted his son to
marry a woman who worshipped Jehovah. So he sent his servant, probably Eliezer, to ?nd a wife for Isaac in a place
named Haran, where some of Abraham’s relatives lived.
Eliezer traveled with other servants of
Abraham. It was a very long journey.
They brought with them ten camels carrying food and gifts. How would Eliezer
know which woman to choose for Isaac?
When Eliezer and the other servants arrived at Haran, they stopped at a well
because Eliezer knew that people would
soon come to get water. He prayed to Jehovah and said: ‘If I ask a young woman
to give me water and she gives me and
my camels water, I will know that this is
the woman you have chosen.’
Then young Rebekah came to the well.
The Bible says that she was very pretty.
Eliezer asked her for a drink of water, and
6

Rebekah was willing to work hard to get
water for the camels

she said: ‘Of course. I will give you the
water, and I will go get some for your
camels too.’ Just think! Thirsty camels
drink a lot of water, so Rebekah had to
run to the well again and again. Do you
see in the picture how hard she is working?— Eliezer was amazed at how Jehovah answered his prayer.
Eliezer gave Rebekah many beautiful
gifts. She invited Eliezer and the other servants to her family’s house. Eliezer
explained why Abraham had sent him
there and how Jehovah had answered
his prayer. Rebekah’s family was happy
to let her marry Isaac.
But do you think Rebekah wanted to
marry Isaac?— Rebekah knew that Jehovah had sent Eliezer there. So when Rebekah’s family asked her if she wanted to
go to Canaan and marry Isaac, she said:
‘Yes, I want to go.’ Right away, she left

QUESTIONS:

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Genesis 12:4, 5; 24:1-58, 67

with Eliezer. When they arrived in Canaan, she married Isaac.
Because Rebekah did what Jehovah
wanted her to do, Jehovah blessed her.
Many years later, Jesus was born in her
family! If you are like Rebekah and make
Jehovah happy, he will bless you too.

Who was Rebekah?
Why did Abraham not want Isaac to marry a woman
from Canaan?
How did Eliezer know that Rebekah was the woman
Isaac should marry?
What can we do to be like Rebekah?

Rebekah went to Canaan with Eliezer
and married Isaac

3

Rahab Believed in Jehovah

Let’s pretend that we are in the city of
Jericho. This city is in the land of Canaan,
where the people do not believe in Jehovah. A woman named Rahab lives here.
When Rahab was a young girl, she
heard stories about how Moses parted
the Red Sea and led the Israelites out of
Egypt. She also heard about how Jehovah helped them to win the wars against
their enemies. Now she hears that the Israelites are camped near Jericho!
One evening, two Israelites go to Jericho to spy on the city. They come to Rahab’s house. She invites them to come
in and stay. During the night, the king
of Jericho ?nds out that spies are in the
city and that they have gone to Rahab’s

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Joshua 2:1-24;
6:1-5, 14, 15, 20-25
Hebrews 11:31

8

house. So the king sends men to get
them. Rahab hides the two spies on the
?at roof of her house and tells the king’s
men: ‘The spies were here, but they have
already left the city. If you go now, you
can still catch them!’ Do you know why
Rahab is protecting the spies?— Because she believes in Jehovah and knows
that he will give the land of Canaan to
the Israelites.
Before the spies leave Rahab’s house,
they promise that she and her family will
be safe when Jericho is destroyed. Do
you know what they tell her to do?—
They say: ‘Take this red rope, and hang it
out of your window. If you do, everyone
who is in your house will be safe.’ Rahab
does exactly what the spies tell her to do.
Do you know what happens next?—
A few days later, the Israelites march
around the city in silence. For six days
they march around the city, one time
each day. But on the seventh day, they
march around the city seven times. Then
they all shout loudly. Jehovah makes
the walls around the city come crashing
down. But the house with the red rope
hanging out of the window is still standing! Can you see it in the picture?—
Rahab and her family are saved!

Rahab protected the spies because she believed in Jehovah

What can you learn from Rahab?—
Rahab believed in Jehovah because of all
the wonderful things she learned about
him. You too are learning many wonderful things about Jehovah. Do you believe in him as Rahab did?— We know
that you do!

Jehovah saved Rahab and her family

QUESTIONS:

What stories did Rahab hear when she was a young girl?
How did she help the Israelite spies? Why did she help them?
What did the spies promise Rahab?
What can you learn from Rahab?
9

4

She Made Her Father
and Jehovah Happy

Do you see the girl in the picture?—
She is the daughter of a man named
Jephthah. The Bible does not tell us her
name, but we know that she made her
father and Jehovah happy. Let’s learn
about her and her father, Jephthah.
Jephthah was a good man and spent a
lot of time teaching his daughter about
Jehovah. He was also a strong man and a
good leader. So the Israelites asked him
to lead them in the ?ght against their enemies.
Jephthah prayed for God’s help to
win. Jephthah promised that if he won,
he would give to Jehovah the ?rst person
who came out of his house when he returned home. This person would live and

Jephthah taught
his daughter
about Jehovah

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Deuteronomy 6:4-6
Judges 11:30-40
1 Corinthians 7:37, 38

10

What promise is
Jephthah making
to Jehovah?

work for the rest of his or her life at God’s
tabernacle. The tabernacle was the place
where people went to worship God back
then. Well, Jephthah won the ?ght! Do
you know who came out of his house
?rst when he returned home?—
Yes, Jephthah’s daughter! She was his
only child, and now Jephthah would
have to send her away. This made him
very sad. But remember, he had made a
promise. Right away, his daughter said:
‘Father, you made a promise to Jehovah,
so you have to keep it.’
Jephthah’s daughter was sad too. At
the tabernacle, she could not get married and have children. But she wanted
very much to keep her father’s promise
and to make Jehovah happy. That was
more important to her than getting married or having children. So she left home
and lived at the tabernacle for the rest of
her life.
Do you think that what she did made
her father and Jehovah happy?— Yes,
it did! If you are obedient and you love
Jehovah, you can be like Jephthah’s
daughter. You too will make your parents
and Jehovah very happy.

QUESTIONS:

It was not easy, but Jephthah’s
daughter did what her father
promised

Every year, the friends
of Jephthah’s daughter
went to visit her

Who was Jephthah? What promise did he make?
Why was it hard for Jephthah’s daughter to do what her father
had promised?
What did Jephthah’s daughter want to do more than anything
else?
How can you be like Jephthah’s daughter?

5

Samuel Kept Doing
What Was Right

From the time Samuel was very young,
he lived and worked at the tabernacle,
the place where people came to worship
Jehovah. Do you know how Samuel got
to be at the tabernacle? Let’s ?rst learn
about Samuel’s mother, Hannah.
For a long time, Hannah could not
have a baby even though she really wanted one. So she prayed to Jehovah and
begged him to help her. She promised
that if she had a son, she would send
him to live and work at the tabernacle. Jehovah answered her prayer, and she had
a son. She named him Samuel. And just
as Hannah had promised, when Samuel
was three or four years old, she took him
to the tabernacle to serve God there.

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
1 Samuel 2:22-26; 3:1-21

12

Eli was the high priest at the tabernacle. His two sons also worked there.
Remember, the tabernacle was God’s
house of worship, and people are supposed to do good things there. But Eli’s
sons were doing very bad things. Samuel saw what they were doing. Did Samuel do bad things as Eli’s sons did?—
No, he kept doing what was right, just as
his parents had taught him to do.
What do you think Eli should have
done about his two sons?— He should
have punished them. He should not
have allowed them to work at God’s
house anymore. But Eli did not do that,
so Jehovah was angry with him and his
two sons. Jehovah decided to punish
them.
One night when Samuel was sleeping,
he heard someone calling him: ‘Samuel!’ He ran to Eli, but Eli said: ‘I did not
call you.’ This happened two more times.
After the third time, Eli told Samuel that
if he heard the voice again, he should
say: ‘Please, Jehovah, speak; I am listening.’ So that is what Samuel did. Then Jehovah said to Samuel: ‘Tell Eli that I will
punish his family for the bad things they
have done.’ Do you think it was easy for

Samuel gave Jehovah’s
message to Eli

Samuel to give Eli this message?— No,
it was not. But even though Samuel was
afraid, he did what Jehovah told him to
do. What Jehovah said came true. Eli’s
two sons were killed, and Eli died too.
Samuel is a good example for us. He
did what was right even though he saw
other people doing bad things. What
about you? Will you be like Samuel and
keep doing what is right? If you do, you
will make both Jehovah and your parents
happy.

QUESTIONS:

What promise did Samuel’s mother make?
What did Samuel see Eli’s sons doing at the tabernacle?
What did Jehovah tell Samuel to do?
Why is Samuel a good example for us?
13

6

David Was Not Afraid

What do you do when you are afraid?—
Maybe you go to your mom and dad
for help. But there is someone else who
can help you too. He is more powerful
than anybody else. Do you know who
it is?— Yes, it is Jehovah God. Let’s talk
about a young man in the Bible named
David. He knew that Jehovah would always help him, so he was not afraid.
From the time David was a baby, his
parents taught him to love Jehovah. This
helped David not to be afraid even when
some scary things happened to him. He
knew that Jehovah was his Friend and
that He would help him. One time, when
David was taking care of some sheep, a
big lion came and grabbed a sheep with

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Psalm 56:3, 4
1 Samuel 17:20-54

14

its mouth! Do you know what David did?
He chased after the lion and apparently
killed it with his bare hands! And then
when a bear attacked the sheep, David
killed it too! Who do you think helped
David?— Yes, it was Jehovah.
There was another time when David
was especially brave. The Israelites were
?ghting against a people called the Philistines. One of the Philistine soldiers was
a very, very tall man, a giant! His name
was Goliath. This giant was making fun
of the Israelite soldiers and of Jehovah.
Goliath dared the Israelite soldiers to
come and ?ght him. But all the Israelites
were too afraid to ?ght him. When David heard about it, he told Goliath: ‘I will
?ght you! Jehovah will help me, and I
will defeat you!’ Do you think that David was brave?— Yes, very brave. Do you
want to know what happened next?
David took his sling and ?ve smooth
stones, and he went out to fight the
giant. When Goliath saw how young David was, he made fun of David. But David
told him: ‘You come to me with a sword,
but I come to you with the name of Jehovah!’ Then he put a stone in his sling, ran
toward Goliath, and threw it straight at
him. The stone hit Goliath right between
the eyes! The giant fell to the ground,

David was not afraid because he knew that Jehovah would help him

dead! The Philistines got so scared that
they all ran away. How was a young boy
like David able to defeat a giant?— Jehovah helped him, and Jehovah was much
more powerful than that giant!

QUESTIONS:

What can you learn from David’s story?— Jehovah is more powerful than
anybody else. And he is your Friend. So
the next time you feel afraid, remember,
Jehovah can help you to be brave!

What did David do when a lion and a bear attacked his sheep?
When Goliath made fun of Jehovah, what did David say
to him?
How did David defeat Goliath?
Why was David not afraid of the lion, the bear, and the giant?
What can you learn from David’s story?
15

7

Do You Ever Feel Lonely
and Afraid?

How do you think
he is feeling?

Jezebel wanted
to kill Elijah

16

Look at the little boy in the picture. He
looks lonely and afraid, doesn’t he? Have
you ever felt that way?— Everyone feels
that way sometimes. The Bible talks
about friends of Jehovah who also felt
lonely and afraid. One of them was Elijah. Let’s learn about him.
Elijah lived in Israel a long time ago,
before Jesus was born. Ahab, the king
of Israel, was not worshipping the true
God, Jehovah. Ahab and his wife, Jezebel, were worshipping the false god Baal.
So most of the people in Israel also began
worshipping Baal. Queen Jezebel was
very mean and wanted to kill all the people who worshipped Jehovah, including
Elijah! Do you know what Elijah did?—
Elijah ran away! He went far into the
desert and hid in a cave. Why do you

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
1 Kings 19:3-18
Psalm 145:18
1 Peter 5:9

think he did that?— Yes, he was afraid.
But Elijah did not need to be afraid. Why?
Because he knew that Jehovah could help
him. Jehovah had shown his power to Elijah before. Once, Jehovah had answered
Elijah’s prayer by sending ?re from heaven. So of course Jehovah could help Elijah
now!
While Elijah was in the cave, Jehovah
spoke to him and asked him: ‘What are
you doing here?’ Elijah answered: ‘I am
the only one who still worships you. I am
all alone, and I am afraid I will be killed.’
Elijah thought that all the other worshippers of Jehovah had been killed. But Jehovah told Elijah: ‘No, that is not true. There
are 7,000 other people who still worship
me. Be brave. I have more work for you to
do!’ Do you think Elijah was happy to
hear that?—
What can you learn from what happened to Elijah?— You never have to feel
lonely and afraid. You have friends who
love Jehovah and who love you. Also, Jehovah has a lot of power, and he will always help you! Are you happy to know
that you are never really alone?—

QUESTIONS:

During Elijah’s time, did most of
the people in Israel worship Jehovah?
Whom did they worship?
Why did Elijah run away and hide in
a cave?
What did Jehovah tell Elijah?
What can we learn from what
happened to Elijah?

How did Jehovah
help Elijah?

8

Josiah Had Good Friends

Do you think it’s hard to do what is
right?— Most people think that it is.
The Bible tells us that it was especially
hard for a boy named Josiah to do what
was right. But he had good friends who
helped him. Let’s learn more about Josiah and his friends.
Josiah’s father was Amon, a king of
Judah. Amon was very bad and worshipped idols. When Josiah’s father died,
Josiah became king of Judah. But he was
only eight years old! Do you think he
was bad like his father?— No, he was
not!
Even when he was very young, Josiah
wanted to obey Jehovah. So he chose to
be friends only with people who loved

Jehovah. And they helped Josiah to do
what was right. Who were some of Josiah’s friends?
One of his friends was Zephaniah.
Zephaniah was a prophet who warned
the people of Judah that bad things

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
2 Chronicles 33:21-25;
34:1, 2; 35:25

Zephaniah warned the people not
to worship idols
18

would happen to them if they worshipped idols. Josiah listened to Zephaniah and worshipped Jehovah, not idols.
Another one of Josiah’s friends was Jeremiah. He was about the same age as Josiah, and they lived near each other as
they were growing up. They were such
good friends that when Josiah died, Jeremiah wrote a special song about how
much he missed Josiah. Jeremiah and Josiah helped each other to do what was
right and to obey Jehovah.
What can you learn from Josiah’s example?— Even when Josiah was just a little boy, he wanted to do what was right.
He knew that he should be friends with
people who love Jehovah. Make sure
that you choose friends who love Jehovah and who can help you to do what is
right!
Josiah and Jeremiah helped each other
to do what was right

QUESTIONS:

Who was Josiah’s father? Did he do what was right?
What did Josiah want to do even when he was just a
little boy?
What were the names of two of Josiah’s friends?
What can you learn from Josiah’s example?
19

9

Jeremiah Did Not Stop
Speaking About Jehovah

Sometimes people make fun of us or get
angry with us when we talk to them
about Jehovah. This can make us want to
stop talking about God. Have you ever
felt that way?— The Bible tells us about a
young man who loved Jehovah but who
almost stopped speaking about him. His
name was Jeremiah. Let’s learn more
about him.
When Jeremiah was a young man, Jehovah told him that he had to warn the
people to stop doing bad things. This
was very hard for Jeremiah, and he was
afraid. He told Jehovah: ‘I don’t know
what to say. I’m just a boy.’ But Jehovah
said: ‘Do not be afraid. I will help you.’

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Jeremiah 1:4-8;
20:7-9; 26:8-19, 24; 38:6-13

Why are the people angry with Jeremiah?
20

So Jeremiah started to warn the people that they would be punished if they
did not change. Do you think the people did what Jeremiah said?— No. They
made fun of him or got very angry with
him. Some even wanted to kill him!
How do you think Jeremiah felt?— He
was afraid and said: ‘I’m not going to
speak about Jehovah anymore.’ But did
he really give up?— No, he did not. He
loved Jehovah so much that he could not
stop speaking about him. And because
Jeremiah did not give up, Jehovah kept
him safe.
For example, some bad men once
threw Jeremiah into a deep hole full of
mud. He had no food or water. Those
men wanted to leave Jeremiah there
to die. But with Jehovah’s help, he escaped!
What can you learn from Jeremiah’s
example?— Even though he was afraid
sometimes, he did not stop speaking
about Jehovah. When you talk about Jehovah, people may make fun of you or
get angry with you. You may feel embarrassed or even afraid. But never stop
speaking about Jehovah. He will always
help you, just as he helped Jeremiah.
Jehovah saved Jeremiah

QUESTIONS:

What did Jehovah tell Jeremiah to do?
Why did Jeremiah almost stop speaking about Jehovah?
How did Jehovah help Jeremiah?
What have you learned from Jeremiah’s example?
21

10

Jesus Always Obeyed

Is it always easy to obey your parents?— Sometimes it is hard. Did you
know that Jesus was obedient both to
Jehovah and to his parents?— His example can help you to obey your parents
even when it’s not easy. Let’s learn more
about this.
Before Jesus was on earth, he was with
his Father, Jehovah, in heaven. But Jesus also had parents here on earth. Their
names were Joseph and Mary. Do you
know how they became his parents?—
Jehovah took the life of Jesus in heaven and put it inside Mary so that Jesus
could be born and live on the earth. This
was a miracle! Jesus grew inside Mary
just as other babies grow inside their

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Luke 1:30-35; 2:45-52
Ephesians 6:1
Hebrews 5:8

22

mothers. About nine months later, Jesus was born. This is how Mary and her
husband, Joseph, became Jesus’ parents
here on earth.
When Jesus was only 12 years old, he
did something that showed how much
he loved his Father, Jehovah. This happened when Jesus and his family made
a long trip to Jerusalem for the Passover. On the way back home, Joseph and
Mary could not ?nd Jesus anywhere. Do
you know where he was?—
Joseph and Mary hurried back to Jerusalem and looked for Jesus everywhere.
They were very worried because they
could not ?nd him. But after three days,
they found him in the temple! Do you
know why Jesus was at the temple?—
Because there he could learn about his
Father, Jehovah. He loved Jehovah and
wanted to learn how to please him.
Even when he grew up and became a
man, Jesus always obeyed Jehovah. Jesus obeyed even when this was hard for
him and it meant that he had to su?er.
Did Jesus also obey Joseph and Mary?—
Yes, the Bible says that he did.
What can you learn from Jesus’ example?— You need to obey your parents, even when it is hard. Will you do
that?—

Why was Jesus at the temple?

QUESTIONS:

How did Joseph and Mary become Jesus’ parents here
on earth?
When Jesus’ parents looked for him in Jerusalem,
where did they ?nd him?
What can you learn from Jesus’ example?
23

11

They Wrote About Jesus

Jude
Matthew
James

John

Mark

Luke

Peter

Paul
What do you know about
these men?

Do you see the men in the picture?— They are Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Peter, James, Jude, and Paul.
These men all lived at the same time as Jesus, and they
wrote about Jesus. Let’s learn more about them.
Three of them were apostles who preached with Jesus. Do you know which three?— Matthew, John,
and Peter. The apostles Matthew and John knew Jesus very well, and they each wrote a book about Jesus’
24

life. The apostle John also wrote a book
called Revelation and three letters called
First John, Second John, and Third John.
The apostle Peter wrote two letters that
are in the Bible. They are called First Peter and Second Peter. In his second letter,
Peter wrote about the time when Jehovah spoke from heaven and said about
Jesus: ‘This is my son. I love him, and I
am proud of him.’
The other men in the picture also
teach us about Jesus in the books that
they wrote. One of them is Mark. He was
probably there when Jesus was arrested
and saw everything that happened. Another one is Luke. He was a medical doctor and probably became a Christian after Jesus died.
Two other Bible writers that you see
in the picture were Jesus’ younger brothers. Do you know their names?— Their
names are James and Jude. At ?rst,
they did not believe in Jesus. They even
thought he was a bit crazy. But they later believed in Jesus and became Christians.
The last Bible writer you see in the picture is Paul. Before he became a Chris-

QUESTIONS:

tian, his name was Saul. He hated Christians and was very mean to them. Do
you know what made Paul want to become a Christian?— One day, Paul was
traveling on the road when he suddenly
heard someone speak to him from heaven. It was Jesus! He asked Paul: ‘Why
are you so mean to those who believe
in me?’ After that, Paul changed and became a Christian. Paul wrote 14 books of
the Bible, Romans through Hebrews.
We read the Bible every day, don’t
we?— By reading the Bible, we learn
many things about Jesus. Would you
like to learn more about Jesus?—

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
2 Peter 1:16-18
Mark 3:21; 14:51
Jude 1
Acts 9:1-18

Which apostles of Jesus wrote about him?
Which two Bible writers were Jesus’ brothers?
How did Paul become a Christian?

25

12

Paul’s Nephew Was
Brave

Let’s learn about a young man who
saved his uncle’s life. The young man’s
uncle was the apostle Paul. We do not
know the young man’s name, but we do
know that he did something very brave.
Would you like to hear about what he
did?—
Paul was in prison in Jerusalem. He
had been arrested because he was
preaching about Jesus. Some bad men
hated Paul, so they made an evil plan.
They said: ‘Let’s ask the army commander to have his soldiers bring Paul to court.
We will hide along the road, and when
Paul passes by, we will kill him!’

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Acts 23:12-24
Matthew 24:14; 28:18-20
1 Timothy 4:16

26

Paul’s nephew heard about this plan.
What would he do? He went to the prison and told Paul about it. Right away,
Paul told him to tell the army commander about the evil plan. Do you think it
was easy for Paul’s nephew to speak
to the commander?— No, because the
commander was an important man. But
Paul’s nephew was brave and spoke to
the commander.
The commander knew exactly what to
do. He got an army of almost 500 soldiers to protect Paul! He told them to
take Paul to Caesarea that night. Was
Paul’s life saved?— Yes, the bad men
could not attack him! Their evil plan did
not work.
What can you learn from this story?— You too can be brave just like Paul’s
nephew. We need to be brave when we
talk to others about Jehovah. Will you
be brave and keep speaking about Jehovah?— If you do, you may save someone’s life.

Paul’s nephew told Paul and the army commander about the evil plan

QUESTIONS:

What did some bad men plan to do to Paul?
What did Paul’s nephew do? Why was that a brave thing to do?
How can you be brave like Paul’s nephew?
27

13

Timothy Wanted to
Help People

Timothy was a young man who was happy to help people. He traveled to many
places to help others. Because of this, he
had a very exciting life. Would you like
to hear about it?—
Timothy grew up in a city called Lystra.
When he was little, his grandmother Lois
and his mother, Eunice, began teaching

him about Jehovah. As Timothy grew up,
he wanted to help others learn about Jehovah.
When Timothy was still a young man,
Paul asked him to travel with him to
preach in other places. Timothy said:
‘Yes!’ He was ready to go and help others.

Timothy’s mother and grandmother taught him about Jehovah

Timothy traveled with Paul to a city
in Macedonia called Thessalonica. To get
there, they had to walk a long way and
then take a boat. When they ?nally arrived, they helped many people to learn
about Jehovah. But some people were
angry and tried to hurt them. So Paul
and Timothy had to leave and preach in
other places.
Some months later, Paul asked Timothy to go back to Thessalonica and see
how the brothers were doing. It took a
lot of courage to go back to that dangerous city! But Timothy went because
he was worried about the brothers there.
He came back to Paul with good news.
The brothers in Thessalonica were doing
very well!
Timothy worked with Paul for many
years. Paul once wrote that Timothy was
the best person he could send to help
the congregations. Timothy loved Jehovah and loved people.
Do you love people and want to help
them learn about Jehovah?— If you do,
you can have a very happy and exciting
life, just as Timothy did!

QUESTIONS:

Timothy had a happy and exciting life

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
2 Timothy 1:5; 3:15
Acts 16:1-5; 17:1-10
1 Thessalonians 3:2-7
Philippians 2:19-22

Where did Timothy grow up?
Did Timothy want to travel with Paul? Why?
Why did Timothy go back to Thessalonica?
How can you have a happy and exciting life, as Timothy did?
29

14

A Kingdom That Will
Rule the Whole Earth

Can you guess what Kingdom we are
talking about?— Yes, it is God’s Kingdom, the Kingdom that will make the
earth a paradise. Would you like to learn
more about this Kingdom?—
Every kingdom has a king. And the
king rules over the people of his land.
Do you know who the King of God’s
Kingdom is?— It is Jesus Christ. He lives
in heaven. Soon he will be King over
everyone on earth! Do you think we will
be happy when Jesus is King over the
whole earth?—
30

We will be very happy! In Paradise,
people will not ?ght or go to war anymore. Everyone will love one another.
Nobody will get sick or die. The blind
will see, the deaf will hear, and those
who cannot walk will be able to run and
jump. Everyone will have plenty to eat.
And animals will be friends with one another and with us. People who have died
will come back to life. Many of the men
and women you have learned about in
this brochure like Rebekah, Rahab, David, and Elijah will come back to life too!

What do you look forward to in Paradise?

Would you like to meet them when
they come back?—
Jehovah loves you and wants you to be
happy. If you keep learning about Jehovah and obeying him, you will be able
to live forever in a beautiful paradise! Is
that what you want?—

QUESTIONS:

READ IN YOUR BIBLE
Isaiah 2:4; 11:6-9; 25:8;
33:24; 35:5, 6
John 5:28, 29; 17:3

Who is the King of God’s Kingdom?
Jesus will be King over whom?
What will it be like when Jesus rules over the earth?
If you want to live forever in Paradise, what do you
have to do?
31

© 2014
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
Publishers
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
October 2013 Printing
This publication is not for sale. It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible
educational work supported by voluntary donations.
Unless otherwise indicated, Scripture quotations are from the modern-language
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
Teach Your Children
English (yc-E)

yc-E
140101

Made in the United States of America

